Hello
Project Gutenberg's The Secret Cache, by E. C. [Ethel Claire] Brill

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Secret Cache
       An Adventure and Mystery Story for Boys

Author: E. C. [Ethel Claire] Brill

Illustrator: W. H. Wolf

Release Date: July 24, 2013 [EBook #43293]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SECRET CACHE ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Rod Crawford, Dave Morgan
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net






“MONGA LOOKED BACK ONCE JUST IN TIME TO SEE ONE OF THE GIANTS SPRING UP
                           OUT OF THE ROCKS.”
                 “The Secret Cache.”    (See Page 277)




                                  THE
                                 SECRET
                                 CACHE


                        AN ADVENTURE AND MYSTERY
                             STORY FOR BOYS

                                   BY
                              E. C. BRILL

                             _ILLUSTRATED_

                         CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY
                         PUBLISHERS    NEW YORK

                         ADVENTURE AND MYSTERY
                            STORIES FOR BOYS


                            _By_ E. C. BRILL


                 Large 12 mo.    Cloth.    Illustrated.


                            THE SECRET CACHE
                         SOUTH FROM HUDSON BAY
                       THE ISLAND OF YELLOW SANDS


                          Copyright, 1932, by
                         Cupples & Leon Company
                          PRINTED IN U. S. A.




                                CONTENTS


  I. The Birch Bark Letter                                             7
  II. The Sloop “Otter”                                               14
  III. Driven Before the Gale                                         22
  IV. The Isle Royale                                                 29
  V. The Half-Breed Brother                                           37
  VI. Down the Northwest Shore                                        46
  VII. At Wauswaugoning                                               55
  VIII. The Blood-Stained Tunic                                       62
  IX. The Giant Iroquois                                              70
  X. The Looming Sailboat                                             77
  XI. The Fire-Lit Orgy                                               85
  XII. The Hungry Porcupine                                           92
  XIII. The Painted Thwart                                           100
  XIV. Sailing Towards the Sunrise                                   110
  XV. The Rift in the Rock                                           117
  XVI. The Cache                                                     127
  XVII. The Sealed Packet                                            137
  XVIII. The Fleeing Canoe                                           147
  XIX. The Bay of Manitos                                            156
  XX. Hugh Climbs the Ridge                                          164
  XXI. The Grinning Indian                                           172
  XXII. Blaise Follows Hugh’s Trail                                  178
  XXIII. A Captive                                                   185
  XXIV. In the Hands of the Giant                                    193
  XXV. The Chief of Minong                                           201
  XXVI. Escape                                                       209
  XXVII. What Blaise Overheard                                       217
  XXVIII. Confusing the Trail                                        223
  XXIX. The Cedar Barrier                                            234
  XXX. The Flight From Minong                                        242
  XXXI. With Wind and Waves                                          249
  XXXII. The Fire at the End of the Trail                            256
  XXXIII. The Capture of Monga                                       264
  XXXIV. Monga’s Story                                               272
  XXXV. The Fall of the Giant                                        280
  XXXVI. How Blaise Missed His Revenge                               290
  XXXVII. The Packet is Opened                                       297




                            THE SECRET CACHE




                                   I
                         THE BIRCH BARK LETTER


On the river bank a boy sat watching the slender birch canoes bobbing
about in the swift current. The fresh wind reddened his cheeks and the
roaring of the rapids filled his ears. Eagerly his eyes followed the
movements of the canoes daringly poised in the stream just below the
tossing, foaming, white water. It was the first day of the spring
fishing, and more exciting sport than this Indian white-fishing Hugh
Beaupré had never seen. Three canoes were engaged in the fascinating
game, two Indians in each. One knelt in the stern with his paddle. The
other stood erect in the bow, a slender pole fully ten feet long in his
hands, balancing with extraordinary skill as the frail craft pitched
about in the racing current.

The standing Indian in the nearest canoe was a fine figure of a young
man, in close-fitting buckskin leggings, his slender, muscular, bronze
body stripped to the waist. Above his black head, bent a little as he
gazed intently down into the clear water, gulls wheeled and screamed in
anger at the invasion of their fishing ground. Suddenly the fisherman
pointed, with a swift movement of his left hand, to the spot where his
keen eyes had caught the gleam of a fin. Instantly his companion
responded to the signal. With a quick dig and twist of the paddle blade,
he shot the canoe forward at an angle. Down went the scoop net on the end
of the long pole and up in one movement. A dexterous flirt of the net,
and the fish, its wet, silvery sides gleaming in the sun, landed in the
bottom of the boat.

The lad on the bank had been holding his breath. Now his tense
watchfulness relaxed, and he glanced farther up-stream at the white water
boiling over and around the black rocks. A gleam of bright red among the
bushes along the shore caught his eye. The tip of a scarlet cap, then a
head, appeared above the budding alders, as a man came, with swift,
swinging strides, along the shore path.

“Holá, Hugh Beaupré,” he cried, when he was close enough to be heard
above the tumult of the rapids. “M’sieu Cadotte, he want you.”

The lad scrambled to his feet. “Monsieur Cadotte sent you for me?” he
asked in surprise. “What does he want with me, Baptiste?”

“A messenger from the New Fort has come, but a few moments ago,” Baptiste
replied, this time in French.

Hugh, half French himself, understood that language well, though he spoke
it less fluently than English.

“From the Kaministikwia? He has brought news of my father?”

“That M’sieu did not tell me, but yes, I think it may be so, since M’sieu
sends for you.”

Hugh had scarcely waited for an answer. Before Baptiste had finished his
speech, the boy was running along the river path. The French Canadian
strode after, the tassel of his cap bobbing, the ends of his scarlet sash
streaming in the brisk breeze.

Hastening past the small cabins that faced the St. Mary’s River, Hugh
turned towards a larger building, like the others of rough, unbarked
logs. Here he knew he should find Monsieur Cadotte, fur trader and agent
for the Northwest Fur Company. Finding the door open, the lad entered
without ceremony.

Monsieur Cadotte was alone, going through for a second time the reports
and letters the half-breed messenger had brought from the Company’s
headquarters on the River Kaministikwia at the farther end of Lake
Superior. The trader looked up as the boy entered.

“A letter for you, Hugh.” He lifted a packet from the rude table.

“From my father?” came the eager question.

“That I do not know, but no doubt it will give you news of him.”

A strange looking letter Cadotte handed the lad, a thin packet of birch
bark tied about with rough cedar cord. On the outer wrapping the name
“Hugh Beaupré” was written in a brownish fluid. Hugh cut the cord and
removed the wrapper. His first glance at the thin squares of white,
papery bark showed him that the writing was not his father’s. The letter
was in French, in the same muddy brown ink as the address. The
handwriting was good, better than the elder Beaupré’s, and the spelling
not so bad as Hugh’s own when he attempted to write French. He had little
difficulty in making out the meaning.

  “My brother,” the letter began, “our father, before he died, bade me
  write to you at the Sault de Ste. Marie. In March he left the Lake of
  Red Cedars with one comrade and two dog sleds laden with furs. At the
  Fond du Lac he put sail to a bateau, and with the furs he started for
  the Grand Portage. But wind and rain came and the white fog. He knew
  not where he was and the waves bore him on the rocks. He escaped
  drowning and came at last to the Grand Portage and Wauswaugoning. But
  he was sore hurt in the head and the side, and before the setting of
  the sun his spirit had left his body. While he could yet speak he told
  me of you, my half-brother, and bade me write to you. He bade me tell
  you of the furs and of a packet of value hid in a safe place near the
  wreck of the bateau. He told me that the furs are for you and me. He
  said you and I must get them and take them to the New Northwest Company
  at the Kaministikwia. The packet you must bear to a man in Montreal.
  Our father bade us keep silence and go quickly. He had enemies, as well
  I know. So, my brother, I bid you come as swiftly as you can to the
  Kaministikwia, where I will await you.

                              Thy half-brother,
                           Blaise Beaupré or Attekonse, Little Caribou.”

Hugh read the strange letter to the end, then turned back to the first
bark sheet to read again. He had reached the last page a second time when
Cadotte’s voice aroused him from his absorption.

“It is bad news?” the trader asked.

“Yes,” Hugh answered, raising his eyes from the letter. “My father is
dead.”

“Bad news in truth.” Cadotte’s voice was vibrant with sympathy. “It was
not, I hope, _la petite vérole_?” His despatches had informed him that
the dreaded smallpox had broken out among the Indian villages west of
Superior.

“No, he was wrecked.” Hugh hesitated, then continued, “On his spring trip
down his boat went on the rocks, and he was so sorely hurt that he lived
but a short time.”

“A sad accident truly. Believe me, I feel for you, my boy. If there is
anything I can do——” Cadotte broke off, then added, “You will wish to
return to your relatives. We must arrange to send you to Michilimackinac
on the schooner. From there you can readily find a way of return to
Montreal.”

Hugh was at a loss for a reply. He had not the slightest intention of
returning to Montreal so soon. He must obey his half-brother’s summons
and go to recover the furs and the packet that made up the lads’ joint
inheritance. Kind though Cadotte had been, Hugh dared not tell him all.
“He bade us keep silence,” Little Caribou had written, and one word in
the letter disclosed to Hugh a good reason for silence.

Jean Beaupré had been a free trader and trapper, doing business with the
Indians on his own account, not in the direct service of any company.
Hugh knew, however, that his father had been in the habit of buying his
supplies from and selling his pelts to the Old Northwest Company. Very
likely he had been under some contract to do so. Yet in these last
instructions to his sons, he bade them take the furs to the _New_
Northwest Company, a secession from and rival to the old organization. He
must have had some disagreement, an actual quarrel perhaps, with the Old
Company. The rivalry between the fur companies was hot and bitter. Hugh
was very sure that if Monsieur Cadotte learned of the hidden pelts, he
would inform his superiors. Then, in all probability, the Old Northwest
Company’s men would reach the cache first. Certainly, if he even
suspected that the pelts were destined for the New Company, Cadotte would
do nothing to further and everything to hinder Hugh’s project. The boy
was in a difficult position. He had to make up his mind quickly. Cadotte
was eying him sharply and curiously.

“I cannot return to Montreal just yet, Monsieur Cadotte,” Hugh said at
last. “This letter is from my half-brother.” He paused in embarrassment.

Cadotte nodded and waited for the boy to go on. The trader knew that Jean
Beaupré had an Indian wife, and supposed that Hugh had known it also.
Part Indian himself, Cadotte could never have understood the lad’s
amazement and consternation at learning now, for the first time, of his
half-brother.

“My father,” Hugh went on, “bade Blaise, my half-brother, tell me to—come
to the Kaministikwia and meet Blaise there. He wished me to—to make my
brother’s acquaintance and—and receive from him—something my father left
me,” he concluded lamely.

Cadotte was regarding Hugh keenly. The boy’s embarrassed manner was
enough to make him suspect that Hugh was not telling the truth. Cadotte
shrugged his shoulders. “It may be difficult to send you in that
direction. If you were an experienced canoeman, but you are not and——”

“But I _must_ go,” Hugh broke in. “My father bade me, and you wouldn’t
have me disobey his last command. Can’t I go in the _Otter_? I still have
some of the money my aunt gave me. If I am not sailor enough to work my
way, I can pay for my passage.”

“Eh bien, we will see what can be done,” Cadotte replied more kindly.
Perhaps the lad’s earnestness and distress had convinced him that Hugh
had some more urgent reason than a mere boyish desire for adventure, for
making the trip. “I will see if matters can be arranged.”




                                   II
                           THE SLOOP “OTTER”


His mind awhirl with conflicting thoughts and feelings, Hugh Beaupré left
Cadotte. The preceding autumn Hugh had come from Montreal to the Sault de
Ste. Marie. Very reluctantly his aunt had let him go to be with his
father in the western wilderness for a year or two of that rough,
adventurous life. Hugh’s Scotch mother had died when he was less than a
year old, nearly sixteen years before the opening of this story. His
French father, a restless man of venturesome spirit, had left the child
with the mother’s sister, and had taken to the woods, the then untamed
wilderness of the upper Great Lakes and the country beyond. In fifteen
years he had been to Montreal to see his son but three times. During each
brief stay, his stories of the west had been eagerly listened to by the
growing boy. On his father’s last visit to civilization, Hugh had begged
to be allowed to go back to Lake Superior with him. The elder Beaupré,
thinking the lad too young, had put him off. He had consented, however,
to his son’s joining him at the Sault de Ste. Marie a year from the
following autumn, when Hugh would be sixteen.

Delayed by bad weather, the boy had arrived at the meeting place late,
only to find that his father had not been seen at the Sault since his
brief stop on his return from Montreal the year before. The disappointed
lad tried to wait patiently, but the elder Beaupré did not come or send
any message. At last, word arrived that he had left the Grand Portage, at
the other end of Lake Superior, some weeks before, not to come to the
Sault but to go in the opposite direction to his winter trading ground
west of the lake. There was no chance for Hugh to follow, even had he
known just where his father intended to winter. By another trader going
west and by a Northwest Company messenger, the boy sent letters, hoping
that in some manner they might reach Jean Beaupré. All winter Hugh had
remained at the Sault waiting for some reply, but none of any sort had
come until the arrival of the strange packet he was now carrying in his
hand. This message from his younger brother seemed to prove that his
father must have received at least one of Hugh’s letters. Otherwise he
would not have known that his elder son was at the Sault. But there was
no explanation of Jean Beaupré’s failure to meet the boy there.

Hugh was grieved to learn of his parent’s death, but he could not feel
the deep sorrow that would have overwhelmed him at the loss of an
intimately known and well loved father. Jean Beaupré was almost a
stranger to his older son. Hugh remembered seeing him but the three times
and receiving but one letter from him. Indeed he was little more than a
casual acquaintance whose tales of adventure had kindled a boy’s
imagination. It was scarcely possible that Hugh’s grief could be deep,
and, for the time being, it was overshadowed by other feelings. He had
been suddenly plunged, it seemed, into a strange and unexpected
adventure, which filled his mind to the exclusion of all else.

He must find some way to reach the Kaministikwia River, there to join his
newly discovered Indian brother in a search for the wrecked bateau and
its cargo of pelts. Of that half-brother Hugh had never heard before. He
could not but feel a sense of resentment that there should be such a
person. The boy had been brought up to believe that his father had loved
his bonny Scotch wife devotedly, and that it was his inconsolable grief
at her death that had driven him to the wilderness. It seemed, however,
that he must have consoled himself rather quickly with an Indian squaw.
Surely the lad who had written the letter must be well grown, not many
years younger than Hugh himself.

As he walked slowly along the river bank, Hugh turned the bark packet
over and over in his hand, and wondered about the half-breed boy who was
to be his comrade in adventure. Attekonse had not spent his whole life in
the woods, that was evident. Somewhere he had received an education, had
learned to write French readily and in a good hand. Perhaps his father
had taught him, thought Hugh, but quickly dismissed that suggestion. He
doubted if the restless Jean Beaupré would have had the patience, even if
he had had the knowledge and ability to teach his young son to write
French so well.

Uncertain what he ought to do next, the puzzled boy wandered along,
glancing now and then at the canoes engaged in the white-fishing below
the rapids. That daring sport had lost its interest for him. At the
outskirts of an Indian village, where he was obliged to beat off with a
stick a pack of snarling, wolf-like dogs, he turned and went back the way
he had come, still pondering over the birch bark letter.

Presently he caught sight once more of Baptiste’s scarlet cap. No message
from Cadotte had brought the simple fellow this time, merely his own
curiosity. Hugh was quite willing to answer Baptiste’s questions so far
as he could without betraying too much. Seated in a sheltered, sunny spot
on an outcrop of rock at the river’s edge, he told of his father’s death.
Then, suddenly, he resolved to ask the good-natured Canadian’s help.

“Baptiste, I am in a difficulty. My half-brother who wrote this,”—Hugh
touched the bark packet—“bids me join him at the Kaministikwia. It was my
father’s last command that I should go there and meet this Blaise or
Little Caribou, as he calls himself. We are to divide the things father
left for us.”

“There is an inheritance then?” questioned Baptiste, interested at once.

“Nothing that amounts to much, I fancy,” the lad replied with an
assumption of carelessness; “some personal belongings, a few pelts
perhaps. For some reason he wished Blaise and me to meet and divide them.
It is a long journey for such a matter.”

“Ah, but a dying father’s command!” cried Baptiste. “You must not disobey
that. To disregard the wishes of the dead is a grievous sin, and would
surely bring you misfortune.”

“True, but what can I do, Baptiste? Monsieur Cadotte doesn’t feel greatly
inclined to help me. He wishes me to return to Montreal. How then am I to
find an opportunity to go to the Kaministikwia?”

Baptiste took a long, thoughtful pull at his pipe, then removed it from
his mouth. “There is the sloop _Otter_,” he suggested.

“Would Captain Bennett take me, do you think?”

“I myself go as one of the crew. To-morrow early I go to Point aux Pins.
Come with me and we shall see.”

“Gladly,” exclaimed Hugh. “When does she sail?”

“Soon, I think. There were repairs to the hull, where she ran on the
rocks, but they are finished. Then there is new rigging and the painting.
It will not be long until she is ready.”

That night Hugh debated in his own mind whether he should tell Cadotte of
his proposed visit with Baptiste to Point aux Pins. He decided against
mentioning it at present. He did not know what news might have come in
Cadotte’s despatches, whether the trader was aware of the elder Beaupré’s
change of allegiance. At any rate, thought the lad, it would be better to
have his passage in the _Otter_ arranged for, if he could persuade her
captain, before saying anything more to anyone.

Early the next morning Baptiste and Hugh embarked above the rapids in
Baptiste’s small birch canoe. The distance to Point aux Pins was short,
but paddling, even in the more sluggish channels, against the current of
the St. Mary’s River in spring flood was strenuous work, as Hugh,
wielding the bow blade, soon discovered. Signs of spring were everywhere.
The snow was gone, and flocks of small, migrating birds were flitting and
twittering among the trees and now and then bursting into snatches of
song. The leaves of birches, willows and alders were beginning to unfold,
the shores showing a faint mist of pale green, though here and there in
the quiet backwaters among rocks and on the north sides of islands, ice
still remained.

At Point aux Pins, or Pine Point, was the Northwest Company’s shipyard.
In a safe and well sheltered harbor, formed by the long point that ran
out into the river, the sailing vessels belonging to the company were
built and repaired. The sloop _Otter_, which had spent the winter there,
was now anchored a little way out from shore. The repairs had been
completed and a fresh coat of white paint was being applied to her hull.
Tents and rude cabins on the sandy ground among scrubby jack pines and
willows housed the workers, and near by, waiting for the fish cleanings
and other refuse to be thrown out, a flock of gulls, gray-winged, with
gleaming white heads and necks, rode the water like a fleet of little
boats. As the canoe approached, the birds, with a splashing and beating
of wings, rose, whirled about in the air, and alighted again farther out,
each, as it struck the water, poising for a moment with black-tipped
wings raised and half spread.

On a stretch of sand beyond the shipyard, Baptiste and Hugh landed,
stepping out, one on each side, the moment the canoe touched, lifting it
from the water and carrying it ashore. Then they sought the master of the
sloop.

Captain Bennett was personally superintending the work on his ship. To
him Baptiste, who had been previously engaged as one of the small crew,
made known Hugh’s wish to sail to the Kaministikwia. The shipmaster
turned sharply on the lad, demanding to know his purpose in crossing the
lake. Hugh explained as well as he could, without betraying more than he
had already told Cadotte and Baptiste.

“Do you know anything of working a ship?” Captain Bennett asked.

“I have sailed a skiff on the St. Lawrence,” was the boy’s reply. “I can
learn and I can obey orders.”

“Um,” grunted the Captain. “At least you are a white man. I can use one
more man, and I don’t want an Indian. I can put you to work now. If you
prove good for anything, I will engage you for the trip over. Here,
Duncan,” to a strapping, red-haired Scot, “give these fellows something
to do.”

So it came about that Hugh Beaupré, instead of going back at once to the
Sault, remained at the Point aux Pins shipyard. He returned in the
_Otter_, when, three days later, she sailed down the St. Mary’s to the
dock above the rapids where she was to receive her lading. In the
meantime, by an Indian boy, Hugh had sent a message to Cadotte informing
him that he, Hugh Beaupré, had been accepted as one of the crew of the
_Otter_ for her trip to the Kaministikwia. Cadotte had returned no reply,
so Hugh judged that the trader did not intend to put any obstacles in the
way of his adventure.

The goods the sloop was to transport had been received the preceding
autumn by ship from Michilimackinac too late to be forwarded across
Superior. They were to be sent on now by the _Otter_. A second Northwest
Company ship, the _Invincible_, which had wintered in Thunder Bay, was
expected at the Sault in a few weeks. When the great canoe fleet from
Montreal should arrive in June, part of the goods brought would be
transferred to the _Invincible_, while the remainder would be taken on in
the canoes. Hugh was heartily glad that he was not obliged to wait for
the fleet. In all probability there would be no vacant places, and if
there were any, he doubted if, with his limited experience as a canoeman,
he would be accepted. He felt himself lucky to obtain a passage on the
_Otter_.

The sloop was of only seventy-five tons burden, but the time of loading
was a busy one. The cargo was varied: provisions, consisting largely of
corn, salt pork and kegs of tried out grease, with some wheat flour,
butter, sugar, tea and other luxuries for the clerks at the
Kaministikwia; powder and shot; and articles for the Indian trade,
blankets, guns, traps, hatchets, knives, kettles, cloth of various kinds,
vermilion and other paints, beads, tobacco and liquor, for the fur
traders had not yet abandoned the disastrous custom of selling strong
drink to the Indians.

During the loading Hugh had an opportunity to say good-bye to Cadotte.
The latter’s kindness and interest in the boy’s welfare made him ashamed
of his doubts of the trader’s intentions.




                                  III
                         DRIVEN BEFORE THE GALE


On a clear, sunny morning of the first week in May, the Northwest
Company’s sloop _Otter_, with a favoring wind, made her way up-stream
towards the gateway of Lake Superior. At the Indian village on the curve
of the shore opposite Point aux Pins, men, women, children and
sharp-nosed dogs turned out to see the white-sailed ship go by. Through
the wide entrance to the St. Mary’s River, where the waters of Lake
Superior find their outlet, the sloop sailed under the most favorable
conditions. Between Point Iroquois on the south and high Gros Cap, the
Great Cape, on the north, its summit indigo against the bright blue of
the sky, she passed into the broad expanse of the great lake. The little
fur-trading vessels of the first years of the nineteenth century did not
follow the course taken by the big passenger steamers and long freighters
of today, northwest through the middle of the lake. Instead, the Captain
of the _Otter_ took her almost directly north.

The southerly breeze, light at first, freshened within a few hours, and
the sloop sailed before it like a gull on the wing. Past Goulais Point
and Coppermine Point and Cape Gargantua, clear to Michipicoton Bay, the
first stop, the wind continued favorable, the weather fine. It was
remarkably fine for early May, and Hugh Beaupré had hopes of a swift and
pleasant voyage. So far his work as a member of the crew of six was not
heavy. Quick-witted and eager to do his best, he learned his duties
rapidly, striving to obey on the instant the sharply spoken commands of
master and mate.

At the mouth of the Michipicoton River was a Northwest Company trading
post, and there the _Otter_ ran in to discharge part of her cargo of
supplies and goods. She remained at Michipicoton over night, and, after
the unloading, Hugh was permitted to go ashore. The station, a far more
important one, in actual trade in furs, than the post at the Sault, he
found an interesting place. Already some of the Indians were arriving
from the interior, coming overland with their bales of pelts on dog
sleds. When the Michipicoton River and the smaller streams should be free
of ice, more trappers would follow in their birch canoes.

As if on purpose to speed the ship, the wind had shifted to the southeast
by the following morning. The weather was not so pleasant, however, for
the sky was overcast. In the air was a bitter chill that penetrated the
thickest clothes. Captain Bennett, instead of appearing pleased with the
direction of the breeze, shook his head doubtfully as he gazed at the
gloomy sky and the choppy, gray water. A sailing vessel must take
advantage of the wind, so, in spite of the Captain’s apprehensive
glances, the _Otter_ went on her way.

All day the wind held favorable, shifting to a more easterly quarter and
gradually rising to a brisk blow. The sky remained cloudy, the distance
thick, the water green-gray.

As darkness settled down, rain began to fall, fine, cold and driven from
the east before a wind strong enough to be called a gale. In the wet and
chill, the darkness and rough sea, Hugh’s work was far harder and more
unpleasant. But he made no complaint, even to himself, striving to make
up by eager willingness for his ignorance of a sailor’s foul weather
duties. There was no good harbor near at hand, and, the gale being still
from the right quarter, Captain Bennett drove on before it. After
midnight the rain turned to sleet and snow. The wind began to veer and
shift from east to northeast, to north and back again.

Before morning all sense of location had been lost. Under close-reefed
sails, the sturdily built little _Otter_ battled wind, waves, sleet and
snow. She pitched and tossed and wallowed. All hands remained on deck.
Hugh, sick and dizzy with the motion, chilled and shivering in the bitter
cold, wished from the bottom of his heart he had never set foot upon the
sloop. Struggling to keep his footing on the heaving, ice-coated deck,
and to hold fast to slippery, frozen ropes, he was of little enough use,
though he did his best.

The dawn brought no relief. In the driving snow, neither shore nor sky
was to be seen, only a short stretch of heaving, lead-gray water.
Foam-capped waves broke over the deck. Floating ice cakes careened
against the sides of the ship. On the way to Michipicoton no ice had been
encountered, but now the tossing masses added to the peril.

Midday might as well have been midnight. The falling snow, fine, icy,
stinging, shut off all view more completely than blackest darkness. The
weary crew were fighting ceaselessly to keep the _Otter_ afloat. The
Captain himself clung with the steersman to the wheel. Then, quite
without warning, out of the northeast came a sudden violent squall. A
shriek of rending canvas, and the close-reefed sail, crackling with ice,
was torn away. Down crashed the shattered mast. As if bound for the
bottom of the lake, the sloop wallowed deep in the waves.

Hugh sprang forward with the others. On the slanting, ice-sheathed deck,
he slipped and went down. He was following the mast overboard, when
Baptiste seized him by the leg. The dangerous task of cutting loose the
wreckage was accomplished. The plucky _Otter_ righted herself and drove
on through the storm.

With the setting of the sun, invisible through the snow and mist, the
wind lessened. But that night, if less violent than the preceding one,
was no less miserable. Armored in ice and frozen snow, the sloop rode
heavy and low, battered by floating cakes, great waves washing her decks.
She had left the Sault on a spring day. Now she seemed to be back in
midwinter. Yet, skillfully handled by her master, she managed to live
through the night.

Before morning, the wind had fallen to a mere breeze. The waves no longer
swept the deck freely, but the lake was still so rough that the
ice-weighted ship made heavy going. Her battle with the storm had sprung
her seams. Two men were kept constantly at the pumps. No canvas was left
but the jib, now attached to the stump of the mast. With this makeshift
sail, and carried along by the waves, she somehow kept afloat.

From the lookout there came a hoarse bellow of warning. Through the
muffling veil of falling snow, his ears had caught the sound of surf. The
steersman swung the wheel over. The ship sheered off just as the foaming
crests of breaking waves and the dark mass of bare rocks appeared close
at hand.

Along the abrupt shore the _Otter_ beat her way, her captain striving to
keep in sight of land, yet far enough out to avoid sunken or detached
rocks. Anxiously his tired, bloodshot eyes sought for signs of a harbor.
It had been so long since he had seen sun or stars that he had little
notion of his position or of what that near-by land might be. Shadowy as
the shore appeared in the falling snow, its forbidding character was
plain enough, cliffs, forest crowned, rising abruptly from the water, and
broken now and then by shallow bays lined with tumbled boulders. Those
shallow depressions promised no shelter from wind and waves, even for so
small a ship as the _Otter_.

No less anxiously than Captain Bennett did Hugh Beaupré watch that
inhospitable shore. So worn was he from lack of sleep, exhausting and
long continued labor and seasickness, so chilled and numbed and weak and
miserable, that he could hardly stand. But the sight of solid land,
forbidding though it was, had revived his hope.

A shout from the starboard side of the sloop told him that land had
appeared in that direction also. In a few minutes the _Otter_, running
before the wind, was passing between forest-covered shores. As the shores
drew closer together, the water became calmer. On either hand and ahead
was land. The snow had almost ceased to fall now. The thick woods of
snow-laden evergreens and bare-limbed trees were plainly visible.

Staunch little craft though the _Otter_ was, her strained seams were
leaking freely, and her Captain had decided to beach her in the first
favorable spot. A bit of low point, a shallow curve in the shore with a
stretch of beach, served his purpose. There he ran his ship aground, and
made a landing with the small boat.

His ship safe for the time being, Captain Bennett’s next care was for his
crew. That they had come through the storm without the loss of a man was
a matter for thankfulness. Everyone, however, from the Captain himself to
Hugh, was worn out, soaked, chilled to the bone and more or less battered
and bruised. One man had suffered a broken arm when the mast went over
side, and the setting of the bone had been hasty and rough. The mate had
strained his back painfully.

All but the mate and the man with the broken arm, the Captain set to
gathering wood and to clearing a space for a camp on the sandy point. The
point was almost level and sparsely wooded with birch, mountain ash and
bushes. Every tree and shrub, its summer foliage still in the bud, was
wet, snow covered or ice coated. Birch bark and the dry, crumbly center
of a dead tree trunk made good tinder, however. Baptiste, skilled in the
art of starting a blaze under the most adverse conditions, soon had a
roaring fire. By that time the snow had entirely ceased, and the clouds
were breaking.

Around the big fire the men gathered to dry their clothes and warm their
bodies, while a thick porridge of hulled corn and salt pork boiled in an
iron kettle over a smaller blaze. The hot meal put new life into the
tired men. The broken arm was reset, the minor injuries cared for, and a
pole and bark shelter, with one side open to the fire, was set up. Before
the lean-to was completed the sun was shining. In spite of the sharp
north wind, the snow and ice were beginning to melt. A flock of
black-capped chickadees were flitting about the bare-branched birches,
sounding their brave, deep-throated calls, and a black and white
woodpecker was hammering busily at a dead limb.

No attempt was made to repair the ship that day. Only the most necessary
work was done, and the worn-out crew permitted to rest. A lonely place
seemed this unknown bay or river mouth, without white man’s cabin,
Indian’s bark lodge or even a wisp of smoke from any other fire. But the
sheltered harbor was a welcome haven to the sorely battered ship and the
exhausted sailors. Wolves howled not far from the camp that night, and
next morning their tracks were found in the snow on the beach close to
where the sloop lay. It would have required far fiercer enemies than the
slinking, cowardly, brush wolves to disturb the rest of the tired crew of
the _Otter_. Hugh did not even hear the beasts.




                                   IV
                            THE ISLE ROYALE


Shortly after dawn work on the _Otter_ was begun. The water was pumped
out, most of the cargo piled on the beach, and the sloop hauled farther
up by means of a rudely constructed windlass. Then the strained seams
were calked and a few new boards put in. A tall, straight spruce was
felled and trimmed to replace the broken mast, and a small mainsail
devised from extra canvas. The repairs took two long days of steady
labor. During that time the weather was bright, and, except in the deeply
shaded places, the snow and ice disappeared rapidly.

From the very slight current in the water, Captain Bennett concluded that
the place where he had taken refuge was a real bay, not a river mouth. He
had not yet discovered whether he was on the mainland or an island. The
repairs to his ship were of the first importance, and he postponed
determining his whereabouts until the _Otter_ was made seaworthy once
more. Not a trace of human beings had been found. The boldness of the
wolves and lynxes, that came close to the camp every night, indicated
that no one, red or white, was in the habit of visiting this lonely spot.

On the third day the sloop was launched, anchored a little way from shore
and rigged. While the reloading was going on, under the eyes of the mate,
the Captain, with Baptiste and Hugh at the oars, set out in the small
boat for the harbor mouth.

The shore along which they rowed was, at first, wooded to the water line.
As they went farther out and the bay widened, the land they were skirting
rose more steeply, edged with sheer rocks, cliffs and great boulders.
From time to time Captain Bennett glanced up at the abrupt rocks and
forested ridges on his right, or across to the lower land on the other
side of the bay. Directly ahead, some miles across the open lake, he
could see a distant, detached bit of land, an island undoubtedly. Most of
the time, however, his eyes were on the water. He was endeavoring to
locate the treacherous reefs and shallows he must avoid when he took his
ship out of her safe harbor.

An exclamation from Baptiste, who had turned his head to look to the west
and north, recalled the Captain from his study of the unfamiliar waters.
Beyond the tip of the opposite or northwestern shore of the bay, far
across the blue lake to the north, two dim, misty shapes had come into
view.

“Islands!” Captain Bennett exclaimed. “High, towering islands.”

Baptiste and Hugh pulled on with vigorous strokes. Presently the Captain
spoke again. “Islands or headlands. Go farther out.”

The two bent to their oars. As they passed beyond the end of the low
northwestern shore, more high land came into view across the water.

“What is it, Baptiste? Where are we?” asked Hugh, forgetting in his
eagerness that it was not his place to speak.

“It is Thunder Cape,” the Captain replied, overlooking the breach of
discipline, “the eastern boundary of Thunder Bay, where the Kaministikwia
empties and the New Fort is situated.”

“Truly it must be the Cap au Tonnerre, the Giant that Sleeps,” Baptiste
agreed, resting on his oars to study the long shape, like a gigantic
figure stretched out at rest upon the water. “The others to the north are
the Cape at the Nipigon and the Island of St. Ignace.”

“We are not as far off our course as I feared,” remarked the Captain with
satisfaction.

Hugh ventured another question. “What then, sir, is this land where we
are?”

Captain Bennett scanned the horizon as far as he could see. “Thunder Cape
lies a little to the north of west,” he said thoughtfully. “We are on an
island of course, a large one. There is only one island it can be, the
Isle Royale. I have seen one end or the other of Royale many times from a
distance, when crossing to the Kaministikwia or to the Grand Portage, but
I never set foot on the island before.” Again he glanced up at the steep
rocks and thick woods on his right, then his eyes sought the heaving blue
of the open lake. “This northwest breeze would be almost dead against us,
and it is increasing. We’ll not set sail till morning. By that time I
think we shall have a change of wind.”

Their purpose accomplished, the oarsmen turned the boat and started back
towards camp. Hugh, handling the bow oars, watched the shore close at
hand. They were skirting a rock cliff, sheer from the lake, its
brown-gray surface stained almost black at the water line, blotched
farther up with lichens, black, orange and green-gray, and worn and
seamed and rent with vertical cracks from top to bottom. The cracks ran
in diagonally, opening up the bay. As Hugh came into clear view of one of
the widest of the fissures, he noticed something projecting from it.

“See, Baptiste,” he cried, pointing to the thing, “someone has been here
before us.”

The French Canadian rested on his oars and spoke to Captain Bennett.
“There is the end of a boat in that hole, M’sieu, no birch canoe either.
How came it here in this wilderness?”

“Row nearer,” ordered the shipmaster, “and we’ll have a look at it.”

The two pulled close to the mouth of the fissure. At the Captain’s order,
Baptiste stepped over side to a boulder that rose just above the water.
From the boulder he sprang like a squirrel. His moccasined feet gripped
the rim of the old boat, and he balanced for an instant before jumping
down. Hugh, in his heavier boots, followed more clumsily. Captain Bennett
remained in the rowboat.

The wrecked craft in which the two found themselves was tightly wedged in
the crack. The bow was smashed and splintered and held fast by the ice
that had not yet melted in the dark, cold cleft. Indeed the boat was half
full of ice. It was a crude looking craft, and its sides, which had never
known paint, were weathered and water stained to almost the same color as
the blackened base of the rocks. The wreck was quite empty, not an oar or
a fragment of mast or canvas remaining.

The old boat had one marked peculiarity which could be seen even in the
dim light of the crack. The thwart that bore the hole where the mast had
stood was painted bright red, the paint being evidently a mixture of
vermilion and grease. It was but little faded by water and weather, and
on the red background had been drawn, in some black pigment, figures such
as the Indians used in their picture writing. Hugh had seen birch canoes
fancifully decorated about prow and stern, and he asked Baptiste if such
paintings were customary on the heavier wooden boats as well.

“On the outside sometimes they have figures in color, yes,” was the
reply, “but never have I seen one painted in this way.”

“I wonder what became of the men who were in her when she was driven on
these rocks.”

Baptiste shook his head. “It may be that no one was in her. What would he
do so far from the mainland? No, I do not think anyone was wrecked here.
This bateau was carried away in a storm from some beach or anchorage on
the north or west shore. There is nothing in her, though she was right
side up when she was driven in here by the waves. And here, in this
lonely place, there has been no one to plunder her.”

“Do no Indians live on this big island?” queried Hugh.

“I have never heard of anyone living here. It is far to come from the
mainland, and I have been told that the Indians have a fear of the place.
They think it is inhabited by spirits, especially one bay they call the
Bay of Manitos. It is said that in the old days the Ojibwa came here
sometimes for copper. They picked up bits of the metal on the beaches and
in the hills. Nowadays they have a tale that spirits guard the copper
stones.”

“If there is copper on the island perhaps this boat belonged to some
white prospector,” suggested Hugh.

Baptiste shrugged his shoulders. “Perhaps, but then the Indian manitos
must have destroyed him.”

“Well, at any rate the old manitos haven’t troubled us,” Hugh commented.

Again Baptiste shrugged. “We have not disturbed their copper, and—we are
not away from the place yet.”

The inspection of the wreck did not take many minutes. When Baptiste made
his report, the Captain agreed with him that the boat had probably
drifted away from some camp or trading post on the mainland, and had been
driven into the cleft in a storm. As nothing of interest had been found
in the wreck, he ordered Baptiste and Hugh to make speed back to camp.

By night the reloading was finished and everything made ready for an
early start. After sunset, the mate, adventuring up the bay, shot a
yearling moose. The crew of the _Otter_ feasted and, to celebrate the
completion of the work on the sloop, danced to Baptiste’s fiddle. From
the ridges beyond and above the camp, the brush wolves yelped in response
to the music.

Baptiste’s half superstitious, half humorous forebodings of what the
island spirits might do to the crew of the _Otter_ came to nothing, but
Captain Bennett’s prophecy of a change of wind proved correct. The next
day dawned fair with a light south breeze that made it possible for the
sloop to sail out of harbor. She passed safely through the narrower part
of the bay. Then, to avoid running close to the towering rocks which had
first appeared to her Captain through the falling snow, he steered across
towards the less formidable appearing northwest shore. That shore proved
to be a low, narrow, wooded, rock ridge running out into the lake. When
he reached the tip of the point, he found it necessary to go on some
distance to the northeast to round a long reef. The dangerous reef
passed, he set his course northwest towards the dim and distant Sleeping
Giant, the eastern headland of Thunder Bay.

To the relief of Hugh Beaupré, the last part of the voyage was made in
good time and without disaster. The boy looked with interest and some awe
at the towering, forest-clad form of Thunder Cape, a mountain top rising
from the water. On the other hand, as the _Otter_ entered the great bay,
were the scarcely less impressive heights of the Isle du Paté, called
to-day, in translation of the French name, Pie Island. Hugh asked
Baptiste how the island got its name and learned that it was due to some
fancied resemblance of the round, steep-sided western peak to a French
paté or pastry.

By the time the sloop was well into Thunder Bay, the wind, as if to speed
her on her way, had shifted to southeast. Clouds were gathering and rain
threatened as she crossed to the western shore, to the mouth of the
Kaministikwia. The river, flowing from the west, discharges through three
channels, forming a low, triangular delta. The north channel is the
principal mouth, and there the sloop entered, making her way about a mile
up-stream to the New Fort of the Northwest Company.

From the organization of the Northwest Fur Company down to a short time
before the opening of this story, the trading post at the Grand Portage,
south of the Pigeon River, and about forty miles by water to the
southwest of the Kaministikwia, had been the chief station and
headquarters of the company. The ground where the Grand Portage post
stood became a part of the United States when the treaty of peace after
the Revolution established the Pigeon River as the boundary line between
the United States and the British possessions. Though the Northwest
Company was a Canadian organization, it retained its headquarters south
of the Pigeon River through the last decade of the eighteenth century. In
the early years of the nineteenth, however, when the United States
government proposed to levy a tax on all English furs passing through
United States territory, the company headquarters was removed to Canadian
soil. Near the mouth of the Kaministikwia River on Thunder Bay was built
the New Fort, later to be known as Fort William after William
McGillivray, head of the company.




                                   V
                         THE HALF-BREED BROTHER


The Northwest Fur Company’s chief post was bustling with activity. The
New Fort itself, a stockaded enclosure, had been completed the year
before, but work on the log buildings within the walls was still going
on. Quarters for the agents, clerks and various employees, storehouses,
and other buildings were under construction or receiving finishing
touches. When the sloop _Otter_ came in sight, however, work ceased
suddenly. Log cabin builders threw down their axes, saws and hammers,
masons dropped their trowels, brick makers left the kilns that were
turning out bricks for chimneys and ovens, the clerks broke off their
bartering with Indians and half-breed trappers, and all ran down to the
riverside. There they mingled with the wild looking men, squaws and
children who swarmed from the camps of the voyageurs and Indians. When
the _Otter_ drew up against the north bank of the channel, the whole
population, permanent and temporary, was on hand to greet the first ship
of the season.

From the deck of the sloop, Hugh Beaupré looked on with eager eyes. It
was not so much of the picturesqueness and novelty of the scene, however,
as of his own private affairs that he was thinking. Anxiously he scanned
the crowd of white men, half-breeds and Indians, wondering which one of
the black-haired, deerskin-clad, half-grown lads, who slipped so nimbly
between their elders into the front ranks, was his half-brother. Many of
the crowd, old and young, white and red, came aboard, but none sought out
Hugh. He concluded that Blaise was either not there or was waiting for
him to go ashore.

Hugh soon had an opportunity to leave the ship. He had feared that he
might be more closely questioned by Captain Bennett or by some of the
crew about what he intended to do at the Kaministikwia, and was relieved
to reach shore without having to dodge the curiosity of his companions.
Only Baptiste asked him where he expected to meet his brother. Hugh
replied truthfully that he did not know.

Unobtrusively, calling as little attention to himself as possible, the
boy made his way through the crowd, but not towards the New Fort. No
doubt the Fort, with all its busy activity in its wilderness
surroundings, was worth seeing, but he did not choose to visit the place
for fear someone might ask his business there. He was keenly aware that
his business was likely to be, not with the Old Northwest Company, but
with its rival, the New Northwest Company, sometimes called in derision
the X Y Company. In a quandary where to look for his unknown brother, he
wandered about aimlessly for a time, avoiding rather than seeking
companionship.

The ground about the New Fort was low and swampy, with thick woods of
evergreens, birch and poplar wherever the land had not been cleared for
building or burned over through carelessness. Away from the river bank
and the Fort, the place was not cheerful or encouraging to a lonely boy
on that chill spring day. The sky was gray and lowering, the wind cold,
the distance shrouded in fog, the air heavy with the earthy smell of
damp, spongy soil and sodden, last year’s leaves. Hugh had looked forward
with eager anticipation to his arrival at the Kaministikwia, but now all
things seemed to combine to make him low spirited and lonely.

That the X Y Company had a trading post somewhere near the New Fort Hugh
knew, but he had no idea which way to go, and he did not wish to inquire.
At last he turned by chance into a narrow path that led through the woods
up-river. He was walking slowly, so wrapped in his own not very pleasant
thoughts as to be scarcely conscious of his surroundings, when a voice
sounded close at his shoulder. It was a low, soft voice, pronouncing his
own name, “Hugh Beaupré,” with an intonation that was not English.

Startled, Hugh whirled about, his hand on the sheathed knife that was his
only weapon. Facing him in the narrow trail stood a slender lad of less
than his own height, clad in a voyageur’s blanket coat over the deerskin
tunic and leggings of the woods and with a scarlet handkerchief bound
about his head instead of a cap. His dark features were unmistakably
Indian in form, but from under the straight, black brows shone hazel eyes
that struck Hugh with a sense of familiarity. They were the eyes of his
father, Jean Beaupré, the bright, unforgettable eyes that had been the
most notable feature of the elder Beaupré’s face.

“Hugh Beaupré?” the dark lad repeated with a questioning inflection. “My
brother?”

“You are my half-brother Blaise?” Hugh asked, somewhat stiffly, in
return.

“_Oui_,” the other replied, and added apologetically in excellent French,
“My English is bad, but you perhaps know French.”

“Let it be French then, though I doubt if I speak it as well as you.”

A swift smile crossed the hitherto grave face. “I was at school with the
Jesuit fathers in Quebec four winters,” Blaise answered.

Hugh was surprised. This new brother looked like an Indian, but he was no
mere wild savage. The schooling in Quebec accounted for the well written
letter. Before Hugh could find words in which to voice his thoughts,
Blaise spoke again.

“I was on the shore when the _Otter_ arrived. I thought when I saw you,
you must be my brother, though you have little the look of our father,
neither the hair nor the eyes.”

“I have been told that I resemble my mother’s people.” Hugh’s manner was
still cool and stiff.

Without comment upon the reply, Blaise went on in his low, musical voice
with its slightly singsong drawl. “I wished not to speak to you there
among the others. I waited until I saw you take this trail. Then, after a
little while, I followed.”

“Do you mean you have been following me around ever since I came ashore?”
Hugh exclaimed in English.

“Not following.” The swift smile so like, yet unlike, that of Jean
Beaupré, crossed the boy’s face again. “Not following, but,”—he dropped
into French-“I watched. It was not difficult, since you thought not that
anyone watched. We will go on now a little farther. Then we will talk
together, my brother.”

Passing Hugh, Blaise took the lead, going along the forest trail with a
lithe swiftness that spurred the older lad to his fastest walking pace.
After perhaps half a mile, they came to the top of a low knoll where an
opening had been made by the fall of a big spruce. Blaise seated himself
on the prostrate trunk, and Hugh dropped down beside him, more eager than
he cared to betray to hear his Indian brother’s story.

A strange tale the younger lad had to tell. Jean Beaupré had spent the
previous winter trading and trapping in the country south of the Lake of
the Woods, now included in the state of Minnesota. Blaise and his mother
had remained at Wauswaugoning Bay, north of the Grand Portage. Just at
dusk of a night late in March, Beaupré staggered into their camp, his
face ghastly, his clothes blood stained, mind and body in the last stages
of exhaustion. At the lodge entrance he fell fainting. It was some time
before his squaw and his son succeeded in bringing him back to
consciousness. In spite of his weakness he was determined to tell his
story. Mustering all his failing strength, he commenced.

Before the snow had begun to melt under the spring sun, he had started,
he told them, with one Indian companion and two dog sleds loaded with
pelts, for Lake Superior. Travelling along the frozen streams and lakes,
he reached the trading post at the Fond du Lac on the St. Louis River.
While he was there, a spell of unusually warm early spring weather
cleared the river mouth. The winter had been mild, with little ice in
that part of the lake. At Fond du Lac Beaupré obtained a bateau, as the
Canadians called their wooden boats, and rigged it with mast and sail. He
and his companion put their furs aboard, and started up the northwest
shore of Lake Superior.

Thus far he succeeded in telling his story clearly enough, then, worn out
with the effort, he lapsed into unconsciousness. Twice he rallied and
tried to go on, but his speech was vague and disconnected. As well as he
could, Blaise pieced together the fragments of the story. Somewhere
between the Fond du Lac and the Grand Portage the bateau had been wrecked
in a storm. When he reached this part of his tale, Jean Beaupré became
much agitated. He gasped out again and again that he had hidden the furs
and the “packet” in a safe cache, and that Blaise and his other son Hugh
must go get them. He called the furs his sons’ inheritance, for he was
clearly aware that he could not live. The pelts were a very good season’s
catch, and the boys must take them to the New Northwest Company’s post at
the Kaministikwia. But it was the packet about which he seemed most
anxious. Hugh must carry the packet to Montreal to Monsieur Dubois.
Blaise asked where his brother was to be found, and received instructions
to go or send to the Sault. Before the lad learned definitely where to
look for the furs and the packet, Jean Beaupré lapsed once more into
unconsciousness. He rallied only long enough for the ministrations of a
priest, who happened to be at the Grand Portage on a missionary journey.

Though Hugh had scarcely known his father, he was much moved at the story
of his death. He felt a curious mixture of sympathy for and jealousy of
his Indian half-brother, when he saw, in spite of the latter’s controlled
and quiet manner, how strongly he felt his loss. Hugh respected the depth
of the boy’s sorrow, yet he could not but feel as if he, the elder son,
had been unrightfully defrauded. The half-breed lad had known their
common father so much better than he, the wholly white son. For some
minutes after Blaise ceased speaking, Hugh sat silent, oppressed by
conflicting thoughts and feelings. Then his mind turned to the present,
practical aspect of the situation.

“It will not be an easy search,” he remarked. “Have you no clue to the
spot where the furs are hidden?”

“None, except that it is a short way only from the place where the
wrecked boat lies.”

“Where the boat lay when father left it,” commented Hugh thoughtfully.
“It may have drifted far from there by now.”

“That is possible. I could not learn from him where the wreck happened,
though I asked several times. The boat was driven on the rocks. That is
all I know.”

“And his companion? Was he drowned?”

Blaise shook his head. “I know not. Our father said nothing of Black
Thunder, but I think he must be dead, or our father would not have come
alone.”

“How shall we set about the search?”

“We will go down along the shore,” Blaise replied, taking the lead as if
by right, although he was the younger by two or three years. “We will
look first for the wrecked bateau. When we have found that, we will make
search for the cache of furs.”

Hugh’s thoughts turned to another part of his half-brother’s tale. “Tell
me, Blaise,” he said suddenly, “what was it caused my father’s death,
starvation, exhaustion, hardship? Or was he hurt when the boat was
wrecked? You spoke of his blood-stained clothes.”

“It was not starvation and not cold,” the half-breed boy replied gravely.
“He was hurt, sore hurt.” The lad cast a swift glance about him, at the
still and silent woods shadowy with approaching night. Then he leaned
towards Hugh and spoke so low the latter could scarcely catch the words.
“Our father was sore hurt, but not in the wreck. How he ever lived to
reach us I know not. The wound was in his side.”

“But how came he by a wound?” Hugh whispered, unconsciously imitating the
other’s cautious manner.

Blaise shook his black head solemnly. “I know not how, but not in the
storm or the wreck. The wound was a knife wound.”

“What?” cried Hugh, forgetting caution in his surprise. “Had he enemies
who attacked him? Did someone murder him?”

Again Blaise shook his head. “It might have been in fair fight. Our
father was ever quick with word and deed. The bull moose himself is not
braver. Yet I think the blow was not a fair one. I think it was struck
from behind. The knife entered here.” Blaise placed his hand on a spot a
little to the left of the back-bone.

“A blow from behind it must have been. Could it have been his companion
who struck him?”

“Black Thunder? No, for then Black Thunder would have carried away the
furs. Our father would not have told us to go get them.”

“True,” Hugh replied, but after a moment of thought he added, “Yet the
fellow may have attacked him, and father, though mortally wounded, may
have slain him.”

A quick, fierce gleam shone in the younger boy’s bright eyes. “If he who
struck was not killed by our father’s hand,” he said in a low, tense
voice, “you and I are left to avenge our father.” It was plain that
Christian schooling in Quebec had not rooted out from Little Caribou’s
nature the savage’s craving for revenge. To tell the truth, at the
thought of that cowardly blow, Hugh’s own feelings were nearly as fierce
as those of his half-Indian brother.




                                   VI
                        DOWN THE NORTHWEST SHORE


Hugh slept on board the _Otter_ that night and helped with the unloading
next day. His duties over, he was free to go where he would. To
Baptiste’s queries, he replied that he had seen his half-brother and had
arranged to accompany him to the Grand Portage. Later he would come again
to the Kaministikwia or return to the Sault by the southerly route.
Having satisfied the simple fellow’s curiosity, Hugh went with him to
visit the New Fort.

Baptiste had a great admiration for the Fort. Proudly he called Hugh’s
attention to the strong wooden walls, flanked with bastions. He obtained
permission to take his friend through the principal building and display
to him the big dining hall. There, later in the year, at the time of the
annual meeting, partners, agents and clerks would banquet together and
discuss matters of the highest import to the fur trade. He also showed
Hugh the living quarters of the permanent employees of the post, the
powder house, the jail, the kilns and forges. When the Fort should be
completed, with all its storehouses and workshops, it would be almost a
village within walls. Outside the stockade was a shipyard and a tract of
land cleared for a garden. Hugh, who had lived in the city of Montreal,
was less impressed with the log structures, many of them still
unfinished, than was the voyageur who had spent most of his days in the
wilds. Nevertheless the lad wondered at the size and ambitiousness of
this undertaking and accomplishment in the wilderness. Far removed from
the civilization of eastern Canada, the trading post was forced to be a
little city in itself, dependent upon the real cities for nothing it
could possibly make or obtain from the surrounding country.

To tell the truth, however, Hugh found more of real interest and novelty
without the walls than within. There, Baptiste took him through the camps
of Indians, voyageurs and woodsmen or coureurs de bois, where bark lodges
and tents and upturned canoes served as dwellings. In one of the wigwams
Blaise was living, awaiting the time when he and his elder brother should
start on their adventurous journey.

Already Blaise had provided himself with a good birch canoe, ribbed with
cedar, and a few supplies, hulled corn, strips of smoked venison as hard
and dry as wood, a lump of bear fat and a birch basket of maple sugar. He
also had a blanket, a gun and ammunition, an iron kettle and a small axe.
Hugh had been able to bring nothing with him but a blanket, his hunting
knife and an extra shirt, but, as he had worked his passage, he still
possessed a small sum of money. Now that he was no longer a member of the
crew of the _Otter_, he had no place to sleep and wondered what he should
do. Blaise solved the problem by taking him about a mile up-river to the
post of the New Northwest or X Y Company, a much smaller and less
pretentious place than the New Fort, and introducing him to the clerk in
charge. Blaise had already explained that he and Hugh were going to get
the elder Beaupré’s furs and would bring them back to the New Company’s
post. So the clerk treated Hugh in a most friendly manner, invited him to
share his own house, and even offered to give him credit for the gun,
canoe paddle and other things he needed. Hugh, not knowing whether the
search for the furs would be successful, preferred to pay cash.

From the X Y clerk the lad learned that his father, always proud and
fiery of temper, had, the summer before, taken offence at one of the Old
Company’s clerks. The outcome of the quarrel had been that Beaupré had
entered into a secret agreement with the New Company, promising to bring
his pelts to them. The clerk warned both boys not to let any of the Old
Company’s men get wind of their undertaking. The rivalry between the two
organizations was fierce and ruthless. Both went on the principle that
“all is fair in love or war,” and the relations between them were very
nearly those of war. If the Old Company learned of the hidden furs, they
would either send men to seek the cache or would try to force the boys to
bring the pelts to the New Fort. The X Y clerk even hinted that Jean
Beaupré had probably been the victim of some of the Old Company’s men who
had discovered that he was carrying his furs to the rival post. Hugh,
during his winter at the Sault, had heard many tales of the wild deeds of
the fur traders and had listened to the most bitter talk against the X Y
or New Northwest company. Accordingly he was inclined to believe there
might be some foundation for the agent’s suspicions. Blaise, however,
took no heed of the man’s hints. When Hugh mentioned his belief that his
father had been murdered because of his change of allegiance, the younger
boy shrugged his shoulders, a habit caught from his French parent.

“That may be,” he replied, “but it is not in that direction _I_ shall
look for the murderer.” And that was the only comment he would make.

To avoid curiosity and to keep their departure secret if possible, the
boys decided not to go down the north branch of the Kaministikwia past
the New Fort, but upstream to the dividing point, then descend the lower
or southern channel. Early the third morning after Hugh’s arrival, they
set out from the New Northwest post. Up the river against the current
they paddled between wooded shores veiled by the white, frosty mist.
Without meeting another craft or seeing a lodge or tent or even the smoke
of a fire, they passed the spot where the middle channel branched off,
went on to the southern one, down that, aided by the current now, and out
upon the fog-shrouded waters of the great bay. Hugh could not have found
his way among islands and around points and reefs, but his half-brother
had come this route less than two weeks before. With the retentive memory
and excellent sense of direction of the Indian, he steered unhesitatingly
around and among the dim shapes. When the sun, breaking through the fog,
showed him the shore line clearly, he gave a little grunt of
satisfaction. He had kept his course and was just where he had believed
himself to be.

This feat of finding his way in the fog gave the elder brother some
respect for the younger. Before the day was over, that respect had
considerably increased. As the older boy was also the heavier, he had
taken his place in the stern, kneeling on his folded blanket. Wielding a
paddle was not a new exercise to Hugh. He thought that Blaise set too
easy a pace, and, anxious to prove that he was no green hand, he
quickened his own stroke. Blaise took the hint and timed his paddling to
his brother’s. Hugh was sturdy, well knit and proud of his muscular
strength. For a couple of hours he kept up the pace he had set. Then his
stroke grew slower and he put less force into it. After a time Blaise
suggested a few minutes’ rest. With the stern blade idle and the bow one
dipped only now and then to keep the course, they floated for ten or
fifteen minutes.

Refreshed by this brief respite and ashamed of tiring so soon, Hugh
resumed work with a more vigorous stroke, but it was Blaise who set the
pace now. In a clear, boyish voice, which gave evidence in only an
occasional note of beginning to break and roughen, he started an old
French song, learned from his father, and kept time with his paddle.

    “Je n’ai pas trouvé personne
  Que le rossignol chantant la belle rose,
    La belle rose du rosier blanc!”

Roughly translated:

    “Never yet have I found anyone
  But the nightingale, to sing of the lovely rose,
    The lovely rose of the white rose tree!”

At first Hugh, though his voice broke and quavered, attempted to join in,
but singing took breath and strength. He soon fell silent, content to dip
and raise his blade in time to the younger lad’s tune. An easy enough
pace it seemed, but the half-breed boy kept it up hour after hour, with
only brief periods of rest.

Hugh began to feel the strain sorely. His arms and back ached, his breath
came wearily, and the lower part of his body was cramped and numb from
his kneeling position. He had eaten breakfast at dawn and, as the sun
climbed the sky and started down again, he began to wonder when and where
his Indian brother intended to stop for the noon meal. Did Blaise purpose
to travel all day without food, Hugh wondered. He opened his lips to ask,
then, through pride, closed them again. Blaise, just fourteen, was nearly
three years younger than Hugh. What Blaise could endure, the elder lad
felt he must endure also. He did not intend to admit hunger or weariness,
so long as his companion appeared untouched by either. With empty stomach
and aching muscles, the white boy plied his paddle steadily and doggedly
in time to the voyageur songs and the droning, monotonous Indian chants,
the constantly repeated syllables of which had no meaning for him.

It was the weather that came to Hugh’s rescue at last. After the lifting
of the chill, frosty, morning fog, the day was bright. The waters of
Thunder Bay were smooth at first, then rippled by a light north breeze.
As the day wore on, the breeze came up to a brisk blow. Partly protected
by the islands and points of the irregular shore, the two lads kept on
their way. The wind increased. It roughened every stretch of open water
to waves that broke foaming on the beaches or dashed in spray against the
gray-brown rocks. Paddling became more and more difficult. Blaise ceased
his songs. As they rounded a low point edged with gravel and sand, and
saw before them a stretch of green-blue water swept by the full force of
the wind into white-tipped waves, the half-breed boy told Hugh to steer
for the beach. A few moments later he gave his elder brother a quick
order to cease paddling.

Realizing that Blaise wished to take the canoe in alone, Hugh, breathing
a sigh of relief, laid down his paddle. The muscles of his back and
shoulders were strained, it seemed to him, almost to the breaking point,
and he felt that, in spite of his pride, he must soon have asked for
rest. Without disturbing the balance of the wobbly craft, he tried to rub
his cramped leg muscles. He feared that in trying to rise and step out,
he might overturn the boat, to the mirth and disgust of his Indian
brother.

With a few strong and skillful strokes, Blaise shot the canoe into the
shallow water off the point. When the bow struck the sand, with a sharp
command to Hugh, he rose and stepped out. As quickly as he could, Hugh
got to his feet, and managed to step over the opposite side without
stumbling or upsetting the canoe. Raising the light bark craft, the two
carried it up the shelving shore, to the bushes that edged the woods,
well beyond the reach of the waves.

The canoe carefully deposited in a safe spot, Hugh turned to Blaise.
“Shall we be delayed long, do you think?” he asked.

Blaise gave his French shrug. “It may be that the wind will go down with
the sun.”

“Then, if we are to stay here so long, a little food wouldn’t come
amiss.”

The younger boy nodded and began to unlash the packages which, to
distribute the weight evenly, were securely tied to two poles lying along
the bottom of the canoe. Hugh sought dry wood, kindled it with sparks
from his flint and steel, and soon had a small fire on the pebbles. From
a tripod of sticks the iron kettle was swung over the blaze, and when the
water boiled, Blaise put in corn, a little of the dried venison, which he
had pounded to a powder on a flat stone, and a portion of fat. He had
made no mention of hunger, but when the stew was ready, Hugh noticed that
he ate heartily. Meanwhile the elder boy, tired and sore muscled, watched
for some sign of weariness in his companion. If Blaise was weary he had
too much Indian pride to admit the fact to his new-found white brother.

The open lake was now rich blue, flecked with foamy whitecaps, the air so
clear that the deep color of the water formed a sharp cut line against
the paler tint of the sky at the horizon. The May wind was bitterly cold,
so the lads rigged a shelter with the poles of the canoe and a blanket.
The ground was so hard the poles could not be driven in. Three or four
inches down, it was either frozen or composed of solid rock. The boys
were obliged to brace each pole with stones and boulders. The blanket,
stretched between the supports, kept off the worst of the wind, and
between the screen and the fire, the two rested in comfort. Hugh soon
fell asleep, and when he woke he was pleased to find that Blaise had
dropped off also. Perhaps the latter was wearier than he had chosen to
admit.

The wind did not go down with the sun, and the adventurers made camp for
the night. Both blankets would be needed for bedding, so the screen was
taken down and the canoe propped up on one side. Then a supply of wood
was gathered and balsam branches cut for a bed. After a supper of corn
porridge and maple sugar, the two turned in. Blaise went to sleep as soon
as he was rolled in his blanket, but Hugh was wakeful. He lay there on
his fragrant balsam bed in the shelter of the canoe, watching the
flickering light of the camp fire and the stars coming out in the dark
sky. Listening to the rushing of the wind in the trees and the waves
breaking on the pebbles and thundering on a bit of rock shore near at
hand, surrounded on every side by the strange wilderness of woods and
waters, the boy could not sleep for a time. He kept thinking of his
roving, half-wild father, and of the strange legacy he had left his sons.
Twice Hugh rose to replenish the fire, when it began to die down, before
he grew drowsy and drifted away into the land of dreams.




                                  VII
                            AT WAUSWAUGONING


Hugh woke chilled and stiff, to find Blaise rekindling the fire. The
morning was clear and the sun coming up across the water. Winds and waves
had subsided enough to permit going on with the journey.

Cutting wood limbered Hugh’s sore muscles somewhat, and a hot breakfast
cheered him, but the first few minutes of paddling were difficult and
painful. With set teeth he persisted, and gradually the worst of the
lameness wore off.

Skirting the shore of Lake Superior in a bark canoe requires no small
amount of patience. Delays from unfavorable weather must be frequent and
unavoidable. On the whole, Hugh and Blaise were lucky during the first
part of their trip, and they reached the Pigeon River in good time.
Rounding the long point to the south of the river mouth, they paddled to
the north end of Wauswaugoning Bay.

Hugh was gaining experience and his paddling muscles were hardening. He
would soon be able, he felt, to hold his own easily at any pace his
half-brother set. So far Blaise had proved a good travelling companion,
somewhat silent and grave to be sure, but dependable, patient and for the
most part even tempered. His lack of talkativeness Hugh laid to his
Indian blood, his gravity to his sorrow at the loss of the father he had
known so much better than Hugh had known him. Blaise, the older boy
decided, was, in spite of his Quebec training and many civilized ways,
more Indian than French. Only now and then, in certain gestures and quick
little ways, in an unexpected gleam of humor or sudden flash of anger,
did the lad show his kinship with Jean Beaupré.

Satisfactory comrade though the half-breed boy seemed, Hugh was in no
haste to admit Blaise to his friendship. Since first receiving his
letter, Hugh had felt doubtful of this Indian brother, inclined to resent
his very existence. Their relations from their first meeting had been
entirely peaceful but somewhat cool and stiff. As yet, Hugh was obliged
to admit to himself, he had no cause for complaint of his half-brother’s
behavior, but he felt that the real test of their companionship was to
come.

The search for the cache of pelts had not yet begun, but was to begin
soon. It was into his wife’s lodge at Wauswaugoning Bay that Jean Beaupré
had stumbled dying. Somewhere between Grand Portage Bay, which lies just
to the west and south of Wauswaugoning, and the Fond du Lac at the mouth
of the St. Louis River, the bateau must have been wrecked and the furs
hidden.

The two boys landed on a bit of beach at the north end of the bay, hid
the canoe among the alders, and set out on foot. Blaise fully expected to
find his mother awaiting him, but the cleared spot among the trees was
deserted. Of the camp nothing remained but the standing poles of a lodge,
from which the bark covering had been stripped, and refuse and cast-off
articles strewn upon the stony ground in the untidy manner in which the
Indians and most of the white voyageurs left their camping places. With a
little grunt, which might have meant either disappointment or disgust,
Blaise looked about him. He noticed two willow wands lying crossed on the
ground and pegged down with a crotched stick.

“She has gone that way,” said the boy, indicating the longest section of
willow, pointing towards the northeast.

“If she travelled by canoe, it is strange we did not meet her,” Hugh
remarked.

Blaise shrugged. “Who knows how long ago she went? The ashes are wet with
rain. I cannot tell whether the fire burned two days ago or has been out
many days. There is another message here.” He squatted down to study the
shorter stick. At one end the bark had been peeled off and a cross mark
cut into the wood. The marked end pointed towards a thick clump of
spruces.

The boy rose and walked towards the group of trees, Hugh following
curiously. Blaise pushed his way between the spruces, and, before Hugh
could join him, came out again carrying a mooseskin bag. In the open
space by the ashes of the fire, he untied the thong and dumped the
contents. There was a smaller skin bag, partly full, a birch bark package
and a bundle of clothing. Tossing aside the bundle, Blaise opened the
small bag, thrust in his hand, then, with the one word “manomin,” passed
the bag to Hugh. It was about half full of wild rice grains, very hard
and dry. The bark package Blaise did not open. He merely sniffed at it
and laid it down. Hugh, picking it up and smelling of it, recognized the
unmistakable odor of smoked fish. The bundle, which the younger boy
untied next, contained two deerskin shirts or tunics, two pairs of
leggings of the same material and half a dozen pairs of moccasins. All
were new and well made, the moccasins decorated with dyed porcupine
quills, the breasts of the tunics with colored bead embroidery.

The lad’s face lighted with a look of pleasure, and he glanced at Hugh
proudly. “They are my mother’s work,” he said, “made of the best skins,
well made. Now we have strong new clothes for our journey.”

“We?” replied Hugh questioningly.

“Truly. There are two suits and six pairs of moccasins. Look.” He held up
one of the shirts. “This she made larger than the other. She knows you
are the elder and must be the larger.” He handed the shirt to Hugh,
following it with a pair of the leggings. Looking over the moccasins, he
selected the larger ones and gave them also to his white brother. “They
are better to wear in a canoe than boots,” he said.

For a moment Hugh was silent with embarrassment. He was touched by the
generosity of the Indian woman, who had put as much time and care on
these clothes for her unknown stepson as upon those for her own boy. He
flushed, however, at the thought of accepting anything from the squaw who
had taken his mother’s place in his father’s life. Yet to decline the
gift would be to offer a deadly insult not only to the Indian woman but
to her son as well.

“I am obliged to your mother,” Hugh stammered. “It was—kind of her.”

Blaise made no other reply than a nod. He appeared pleased with the
appearance and quality of the clothes, but took it as a matter of course
that his mother should make them for Hugh as well as for himself.

“I wish she had left more food,” he said after a moment, “but at this
time of the year food is scarce. That manomin is all that remained of the
harvest of the autumn. We have eaten much of our food. We must fish when
we can.”

“Can’t we buy corn and pork from the traders at the Grand Portage?” Hugh
inquired.

Blaise shook his head doubtfully. “We will try,” he said.

He put the food back in the mooseskin bag and hung it on a tree. Then he
turned to Hugh and said softly and questioningly, “You wish to see where
we laid him?”

Hugh nodded, a lump rising in his throat, and followed his brother.
Beyond the clump of spruces, in a tiny clearing, was Jean Beaupré’s
grave. Hugh was surprised and horrified to see that it was, in
appearance, an Indian grave. Poles had been stuck in the ground on either
side, bent over and covered with birch bark. The boy’s face flushed with
indignation.

“Why,” he demanded, “did you do that?” He pointed to the miniature lodge.

Blaise looked puzzled. “It is the Ojibwa custom.”

“Father was not an Ojibwa. He was a white man and should have been buried
like a white man and a Christian,” Hugh burst out.

Blaise drew himself up with a dignity strange in so young a lad. “He
_was_ buried like a Christian,” he replied quietly. “Look.” He pointed to
the rude cross set up in front of the opening to the shelter, instead of
the pole, with offerings and trophies hung upon it, usually placed beside
Ojibwa graves. “The good father absolved him and read the burial service
over him,” the lad went on, “and I placed the cross there. Then the
friends of my mother covered the spot according to the Ojibwa custom. Our
father was an Ojibwa by adoption and it was right they should do that.
Now no Ojibwa will ever disturb that spot.”

Hugh’s anger had been cooling. After all, his father had thrown in his
lot with the Indians and they had meant to honor him. At least he had
received Christian burial, and it was something to know that his grave
would not be disturbed. In silence Hugh turned away. He could not quite
bring himself to apologize for his hasty words.

The relations between the half-brothers were more than ordinarily cool
the rest of that day. Blaise, travelling overland by a trail he knew,
went to the Grand Portage Bay in quest of supplies. Even before the
formation of the Northwest Company, the bay had been a favorite stopping
place, first for the French, and then for the English traders who
followed the Pigeon River route to the country west of the lake. An old
Indian trail led from the bay to a spot on the river above the falls and
rapids that make its lower course unnavigable. Gitchi Onegam
Kaministigoya the Indians had called the trail and the bay, “the great
carrying place of the river that is hard to navigate.” Early in the
history of the fur trade, the white traders began to use that trail,
portaging their goods some nine miles from the bay to the river and
bringing the bales of furs back over the same route.

Since the Old Northwest Company had removed its headquarters to Thunder
Bay and had practically abandoned the Pigeon River route for the
Kaministikwia, Grand Portage was not so busy a place, but the Old Company
still maintained a post at the partly deserted fort on the north shore of
the bay. On the west side the chief post and headquarters of the New
Company also remained open for business. Blaise visited both posts, only
to find that, as the winter’s supplies were almost exhausted and no one
knew when fresh stores would arrive, nothing could be spared.

Anxious to avoid questions, Hugh had not accompanied Blaise. He occupied
himself with fishing from the canoe, and caught one lake trout of about
three pounds weight. Making a grill of willow twigs resting on stones
over the coals, he had the trout ready to broil when Blaise returned. The
common way of cooking fish among both the Indians and white men of the
woods was to boil them, but Hugh, recently from the civilized world,
preferred his broiled, baked or fried.

Blaise, after one mouthful, deigned to approve his elder brother’s
cooking. “It is good,” he said. “I have not eaten fish so cooked since I
ate it on Fridays in school at Quebec.”

Neither lad had anything more to say during the meal or for some time
afterwards. Finally Blaise put his hand in the leather pouch he wore at
his belt, drew out something and handed it to Hugh. The latter unwrapped
the bit of soft doeskin and found his father’s gold seal ring. He glanced
quickly up at Blaise.

“It is yours,” the younger brother said. “I gave it not to you before,
because I liked not to part with it.”

Moved by a generous impulse, Hugh stretched out his hand to return the
ring, but Blaise would not take it.

“No,” he said firmly. “You are the elder son. It is yours.”

The adventurers intended to continue their trip next day, but fate was
against them. Before dawn rain was beating on the canoe that sheltered
them, and the thundering of the waves on the rocks in the more exposed
part of the bay sounded in Hugh’s ears as he woke. That storm was the
beginning of a period of bad weather, rain, fog, and wind that cleared
the air, but rose to a gale, lashing the waters of the bay to
white-capped waves that did not diminish until hours after the wind had
blown itself out. Eight days the two camped in a hastily built wigwam on
Wauswaugoning Bay, fishing when they could, and snaring one lean hare and
a few squirrels. They hunted for larger game and found some deer tracks,
but did not catch sight of the animals. As for birds, they saw none but
gulls, a loon or two and an owl, and did not care to try anything so
tough and strong for food. So they were obliged to consume a good part of
their corn.




                                  VIII
                        THE BLOOD-STAINED TUNIC


But a few days of May remained when Hugh and Blaise left Wauswaugoning.
Their progress was necessarily slow, not only on account of delays due to
wind and weather, but because they were obliged to skirt the shore
closely, entering each bay and cove, rounding every point, and keeping
keen watch for any sign of the wrecked boat. They had no clue to the spot
where it lay. It might have been thrown up on the open shore, or driven
into some rock-infested bay or stream mouth. At each stream they made a
close examination, ascending a short distance, by canoe where that was
possible, or up over the rocky banks on foot. They had searched the
mouths of more than a dozen streams and creeks when they came to one,
where Blaise, in entering, cautioned Hugh to steer far to one side.
Almost across the river mouth extended a long bar of sand and gravel,
covered by an inch or two of water, for the river was still high from the
spring flood. Bars or rock reefs were, Hugh was learning, common
characteristics of the streams emptying into Superior. To enter them
without accident required care and caution.

The bar was passed, but further progress up-stream proved impossible. The
current was strong, and just ahead were foaming rapids where the water
descended among rocks and over boulders. Steering into a bit of quiet
backwater behind the bar, the boys found a landing place and carried the
canoe ashore. Then they scrambled up the bank a short distance, searching
the stream mouth for signs of the wreck. Caught in a blossoming
serviceberry bush growing on a rock at the very edge of the river, Blaise
found an old moccasin. He examined the ragged, dirty, skin shoe in
silence for a moment. Then, hazel eyes gleaming, he held the thing out to
Hugh.

“It is my mother’s work,” he said in tense tones. Hugh snatched the worn
moccasin. “Do you mean this was my father’s?”

Blaise nodded. “It is my mother’s work,” he repeated. “I would know it
anywhere, the pattern of quills, the shaping, even the skin. It is from
the elk hide our father brought from the region of the great river.” He
made a gesture towards the southwest, and Hugh knew he referred to the
Mississippi. “See, it is just like ours,” Blaise concluded, holding up
one foot.

Hugh glanced from the almost new moccasin to the ragged one, and drew a
long breath. “Then it may be about here somewhere father was wrecked.”

“We must make search,” was the brief reply.

Thoroughly they searched, first the banks of the stream, then the lake
beach, parallel ridges of flat flakes of rock pushed up by the waves.
They even examined the ground beyond the beach, a rough slope composed of
the same sort of dark rock flakes, partly decomposed into crumbly soil.
The two pushed through the bushes and small trees that sparsely clothed
the stony ground, but nowhere did they find any sign of wrecked boat or
hidden cache. Yet they did find something, something that hinted of
violence and crime.

Well up from the shore and not far from the stream bank, Hugh came upon
an open space, where a ring of blackened stones and ashes showed that a
cooking fire had burned. He took one look, turned and plunged into the
bushes to find Blaise. But he stopped suddenly. His foot had come in
contact with something that was not a rock, a stump or a stick. Stooping,
he pulled from under a scraggly wild raspberry, where it had been dropped
or thrust, a bundle. Unrolling it, he found it to be a ragged deerskin
tunic, damp, dirty and bearing dark stains. The boy stood transfixed
staring at the thing in his hands. After a moment he raised his head and
shouted for Blaise.

Blaise answered from near by, but to Hugh it seemed a long time before
the younger boy came through the bushes. In silence the elder handed the
other the stained shirt. Blaise took it, examined it quickly and uttered
an Indian grunt.

“Blood?” asked Hugh pointing to the stains.

Blaise grunted assent.

“Father’s blood?” Hugh’s voice broke.

Blaise looked up quickly. “No, no. Black Thunder’s.”

“How do you know?”

“By this.” The lad pointed to a crude figure, partly painted, partly
embroidered in black wool, on the breast of the tunic. “This is Black
Thunder’s mark, the thunder bird. Without doubt this shirt was his.”

“But how did it come here? There’s no sign of the wrecked boat.”

Blaise shook his head in puzzlement. “I do not understand,” he said
slowly.

The half-breed lad was keen witted in many ways, but the white boy’s mind
worked more quickly on such a problem. “It may be,” Hugh speculated,
“that they were wrecked farther along the shore. Coming on by land, they
camped here and some accident happened to Black Thunder, or perhaps he
had been bleeding from a hurt received in the wreck, and he changed his
shirt and threw away the bloody one.”

“Where was it?” asked Blaise.

“Under this raspberry bush, rolled up.”

“And why think you they camped here?”

“I’ll show you.”

Hugh led the way to the little clearing. Carefully and absorbedly Blaise
examined the spot.

“Someone has camped here,” he concluded, “but only a short time, not more
than one night. He made no lodge, for there are no poles. He cut no
boughs for beds, and he left scarce any litter. It may be he cooked but
one meal and went on. If he lay here for the night, the marks of his body
no longer remain. If anyone was slain here,” he added after a moment,
“the rains washed out the stains. It was a long time ago that he was
here, I think.”

“If Black Thunder was killed here,” Hugh questioned, “what was done with
his body?”

Blaise shrugged. “There is the lake, and a body weighted with stones
stays down.”

“Then why was his blood-stained shirt not sunk with him?”

“That I know not,” and the puzzled look returned to the lad’s face.

“Might it not be that father was wearing Black Thunder’s shirt and that
the stains are from his wound?”

“He wore his own when he came to the lodge, and the stains are in the
wrong place. They are on the breast. No, he never wore this shirt. The
blood must be Black Thunder’s.”

The sun was going down when the two boys finally gave up the search for
the wrecked boat or some further trace of Jean Beaupré and his companion.
Neither lad had any wish to camp in the vicinity. Blaise especially
showed strong aversion to the spot.

“There are evil stories of this river,” he explained to his brother. “If
our father camped here, it was because he was very weary indeed. He was a
brave man though, far braver than most men, white or red.”

“Why should he have hesitated to camp here?” Hugh inquired curiously.
“It’s true we have seen pleasanter spots along this shore, yet this is
not such a bad one.”

“There are evil stories of the place,” Blaise repeated in a low voice.
“The lake from which this river flows is the abode of a devil.” The boy
made the sign of the cross on his breast and went on in his musical
singsong. “On the shores of that lake have been found the devil’s tracks,
great footprints, like those of a man, but many times larger and very far
apart. So the lake is called the ‘Lake of Devil Tracks’ and the river
bears the same name. It is said that when that devil wishes to come down
to the shore of the great lake to fish for trout, it is this way he
comes, striding along the bed of the river, even at spring flood.”

Hugh Beaupré, half Scotch, half French, and living in a time when the
superstitious beliefs of an earlier day persisted far more actively than
they do now, was not without his share of such superstitions. But this
story of a devil living on a lake and walking along a river, struck him
as absurd and he said so with perfect frankness.

“Surely you don’t believe such a tale, Blaise, and neither did my
father.”

“I know not if the tale is true,” the younger boy answered somewhat
sullenly. “Men say they have seen the footprints and everyone knows there
are devils, both red and white. Why should not one live on that lake
then? How know we it was not that devil who killed Black Thunder and left
the bloody tunic under the raspberry bush as a warning to others not to
camp on his hunting ground? I am no coward, as I will speedily show you
if you want proof, but I will not camp here. If you stay, you stay
alone.”

“I don’t want to stay,” Hugh replied quickly. “Devil or not, I don’t like
the place. We’ll go on till we find a better camping ground.”

In the light of the afterglow, which was tinting sky and water with pale
gold, soft rose and lavender, and tender blue, they launched their canoe
again and paddled on. The peace and beauty around him made the sinister
thing he had found under the raspberry bush, and the evil deed that thing
suggested, seem unreal to Hugh, almost as unreal as the devil who lived
at the lake and walked down the river to his fishing. Nevertheless he
turned his eyes from the soft colors of sky and water to scan the shore
the canoe was skirting. Not a trace of the wrecked bateau appeared,
though both boys watched closely.

Several miles beyond the Devil Track River, they made camp on a sloping
rock shore wooded with spruce and balsam, where nothing worse than a
plague of greedy mosquitoes disturbed their rest. Hugh thought of
suggesting that the horde of voracious insects might have been sent by
the evil spirit of Devil Track Lake to torment the trespassers. Fearing
however that a humorous treatment of his story might offend the halfbreed
lad’s sensitive pride, he kept the fancy to himself.

Going on with their journey the next morning, the two came to the spot
known to the French fur traders and to the English who followed them as
the Grand Marais, the great marsh or meadow. There a long sand and gravel
point connects with a low, marshy shore, a higher, rocky stretch, once a
reef or island, running at right angles to the gravel spit. The T-shaped
projection forms a good harbor for small boats. Closely scanning every
foot of beach and rock shore, Hugh and Blaise paddled around the T. On
the inner side of the spit, they caught sight of what appeared to be part
of a boat half buried in the sand and gravel. They landed to investigate.
The thing was indeed the shattered remnants of a wreck, old and weathered
and deep in sand and pebbles. It was not Jean Beaupré’s boat, but a birch
canoe.

Leaving the T, the lads skirted the low, curving shore. When they rounded
the little point beyond, they discovered that the waves, which had been
increasing for some hours, had reached a height dangerous to a small
boat. The time was past noon, and Blaise thought that the sea would not
be likely to go down before sunset. So he gave the word to turn back and
seek a camping ground. In the angle of the T just where the sand spit
joined the rocky reef, they found shelter.

Realizing that they must conserve their scanty food supply, the two,
instead of eating at once, went fishing in the sheltered water. Hugh, in
the stern of the canoe, held the hand line, while Blaise paddled. Luck
was with them and when they went ashore an hour later they had four fine
trout, the smallest about three and the largest at least eight pounds. In
one thing at least, cooking fish, Hugh excelled his younger brother. He
set about broiling part of his catch as soon as he had cleaned them.
Without touching their other supplies, the lads made a hearty meal of
trout.

The wind did not fall till after sunset. Knowing it would be some hours
before the lake would be calm enough for canoe travel, the boys prepared
to stay where they were till morning. The night was unusually mild for
the time of year, so they stretched themselves under their canoe and let
the fire burn itself out.




                                   IX
                           THE GIANT IROQUOIS


At dawn Hugh woke and found his half-brother stirring.

“I go to see how the lake appears,” Blaise explained.

“I’ll go with you,” was Hugh’s reply, and Blaise nodded assent.

They crawled out from under the canoe, and, leaving the beach, climbed up
the rocky cross bar of the T-shaped point. The younger boy in the lead,
they crossed the rough, rock summit, pushing their way among stunted
evergreens and bushes now leafed out into summer foliage. Suddenly Blaise
paused, turned his head and laid his finger on his lips. Hugh strained
his ears to listen, but could catch no sound but the whining cry of a
sea-gull and the rippling of the water on the outer rocks. Blaise had
surely heard something, for he dropped on hands and knees and crept
forward. Hugh followed in the same manner, trying to move as noiselessly
as the Indian lad. With all his caution, he could not avoid a slight
rustling of undergrowth and bushes. Blaise turned his head again to
repeat his gesture of silence.

After a few yards of this cautious progress, Blaise came to a stop.
Crawling up beside his brother, Hugh found himself on the edge of a steep
rock declivity. Lying flat, screened by an alder and a small balsam fir,
he looked out across the water. He saw what Blaise had heard. Only a few
hundred feet away were two canoes, three men in each. Even at that short
distance Hugh could barely detect the sound of the dipping paddles and
the water rippling about the prows. His respect for his half-brother’s
powers of hearing increased.

The sun had not yet risen, but the morning was clear of fog or haze. As
the first canoe passed, the figures of the men stood out clear against
lake and sky. Hugh’s attention was attracted to the man in the stern.
Indeed that man was too notable and unusual a figure to escape attention.
A gigantic fellow, he towered, even in his kneeling position, a good foot
above his companions. A long eagle feather upright from the band about
his head made him appear still taller, while his huge shoulders and
big-muscled arms were conspicuous as he wielded his paddle on the left
side of the canoe.

Hugh heard Blaise at his side draw a quick breath. “Ohrante!” he
whispered in his elder brother’s ear. “Do not stir!”

Obeying that whispered command, Hugh lay motionless, bearing with Spartan
fortitude the stinging of the multitude of mosquitoes that surrounded
him. When both canoes had rounded a point farther up the shore and
vanished from sight, Blaise rose to his feet. Hugh followed his example,
and they made their way back across the rocks in silence. By the time
camp was reached, the elder brother was almost bursting with curiosity.
Who was the huge Indian, and why had Blaise been so startled, even
frightened, at the sight of him?

“Who is Ohrante?” Hugh asked, as he helped to lift the canoe from the
poles that propped it.

“He is more to be feared than the devil of the lake himself,” was the
grim reply. Then briefly Blaise told how the big Indian, the summer
before, had treacherously robbed and slain a white trader and had
severely wounded his Ojibwa companion, scalped him and left him to die.
The wounded man had not died, though he would always be a cripple. He had
told the tale of the attack, and a party of Ojibwas, led by Hugh’s
father, had pursued Ohrante and captured him. They were taking him back
to stand trial by Indian law or to be turned over to white justice,—there
was some disagreement between Jean Beaupré and his companions as to which
course should be followed,—when the giant made his escape through the
help of two of the party who secretly sympathized with him and had fled
with him. From that day until this morning, when he had recognized the
big Indian in the passing canoe, Blaise had heard nothing of Ohrante.

“But two men went with him when he fled,” the boy concluded. “Now he has
five. He is bold to return so soon. I am glad he goes up the shore, not
down. I should not wish to follow him or have him follow us. He hated our
father and nothing would please him more than to get us in his hands. I
hope my mother is with others, a strong party. I think Ohrante will not
risk an encounter with the Ojibwas again so soon, unless it be with two
or three only.”

“Isn’t he an Ojibwa himself?” Hugh asked.

“No, he is a Mohawk, one of the Iroquois wolves the Englishmen have
brought into the Ojibwa country to hunt and trap for the Old Company. It
is said his mother was an Ojibwa captive, but Ohrante is an evil Iroquois
all through.”

“Monsieur Cadotte says the bringing in of Iroquois hunters is unwise
policy,” Hugh remarked.

“The company never did a worse thing,” Blaise replied passionately. “The
Iroquois hunters trap and shoot at all seasons of the year. They are
greedy for pelts good and bad, and care not how quickly they strip the
country of beasts of all kinds. If the company brings in many more of
these thieving Iroquois, the Ojibwa, to whom the land belongs, will soon
be left without furs or food.”

“That is short-sighted policy for the company itself, it seems to me,”
commented Hugh.

“So our father said. He too hated the Iroquois intruders. He told the men
of the company they did ill to bring strange hunters into lands where
they had no right. Let the Iroquois keep to their own hunting grounds.
Here they do nothing but harm, and Ohrante is the worst of them all.”

Hugh had scarcely heard the last part of the lad’s speech. His mind was
occupied with a thought which had just come to him. “Do you think,” he
asked suddenly, “that it was Ohrante who killed father?”

“I had not thought it till I saw him passing by,” Blaise replied gravely.
“I believed it might be another enemy. Now I know not what to think. I
cannot believe the traders have brought Ohrante back to hunt and trap for
them. And my heart is troubled for my mother. Once when she was a girl
she was a captive among the Sioux. To be captured by Ohrante would be
even worse, and now there is no Jean Beaupré to take her away.”

“Do you mean that father rescued her from the Sioux?” Hugh asked in
surprise.

“He found her among the Sioux far south of here on the great river. She
was sad because she had been taken from her own people. So he bought her
from the chief who wished to make her his squaw. Then our father brought
her to the Grand Portage. There the priest married them. She was very
young then, young and beautiful. She is not old even now, and she is
still beautiful,” Blaise added proudly.

Hugh had listened to this story with amazement. Had he misjudged his own
father? Was it to be wondered at that the warm-hearted young Frenchman
should have taken the only possible way to save the sad Ojibwa girl from
captivity among the cruel Sioux? The elder son felt ashamed of his bitter
thoughts. Blaise loved his mother and was anxious about her. Hugh tried
to comfort his younger brother as well as he could.

“The willow wand showed that your mother had gone up the shore,” he
hastened to say. “Ohrante is not coming from that way, but from the
opposite direction, and there are no women in his canoes. Surely your
mother is among friends by this time, and Ohrante, the outlaw, will never
dare attack them.”

“That is true,” Blaise replied. “She cannot have fallen into his hands,
and he, with so few followers, will not dare make open war.” He was
silent for a moment. Then he said earnestly, “There is but one thing for
us to do. We must first find the wreck and the cache, as our father bade
us. Then we must track down his murderer.”

Hugh nodded in perfect agreement. “Let us get our breakfast and be away
then.”

Blaise was untying the package of maple sugar. He took out a piece and
handed it to Hugh. “We make no fire here,” he said abruptly. “The
Iroquois is not yet far away. He might see the smoke. We will go now.
When the wind rises again we can eat.”

Hugh was hungry, but he had no wish to attract the attention of the huge
Mohawk and his band. So he made no objection, but nibbled his lump of
sugar as he helped to load the canoe and launch it. Before the sun peeped
over the far-away line where lake and sky met, the two lads were well on
their way again.

Historian R.B. Cribb argues that Gandhi's thought evolved over time, with his early ideas becoming the core or scaffolding for his mature philosophy. In London he committed himself to truthfulness, temperance, chastity, and vegetarianism. His return to India to work as a lawyer was a failure, so he went to South Africa for a quarter century, where he absorbed ideas from many sources, most of them non-Indian.[136] Gandhi grew up in an eclectic religious atmosphere and throughout his life searched for insights from many religious traditions.[137] He was exposed to Jain ideas through his mother who, was in contact with Jain monks. Themes from Jainism that Gandhi absorbed included asceticism; compassion for all forms of life; the importance of vows for self-discipline; vegetarianism; fasting for self-purification; mutual tolerance among people of different creeds; and "syadvad", the idea that all views of truth are partial, a doctrine that lies at the root of Satyagraha.[138] He received much of his influence from Jainism particularly during his younger years.[139]
Gandhi's London experience provided a solid philosophical base focused on truthfulness, temperance, chastity, and vegetarianism. When he returned to India in 1891, his outlook was parochial and he could not make a living as a lawyer. This challenged his belief that practicality and morality necessarily coincided. By moving in 1893 to South Africa he found a solution to this problem and developed the central concepts of his mature philosophy.[140] N. A. Toothi[141] felt that Gandhi was influenced by the reforms and teachings of Swaminarayan, stating "Close parallels do exist in programs of social reform based on to non-violence, truth-telling, cleanliness, temperance and upliftment of the masses."[142] Vallabhbhai Patel, who grew up in a Swaminarayan household was attracted to Gandhi due to this aspect of Gandhi's doctrine.[143]
Gandhi's ethical thinking was heavily influenced by a handful of books, which he repeatedly meditated upon. They included especially Plato's Apology, (which he translated into his native Gujarati); William Salter's Ethical Religion (1889); Henry David Thoreau's On the Duty of Civil Disobedience (1847); Leo Tolstoy's The Kingdom of God Is Within You (1893); and John Ruskin's Unto this Last (1862), which he also translated into Gujarati. Ruskin inspired his decision to live an austere life on a commune, at first on the Phoenix Farm in Natal and then on the Tolstoy Farm just outside Johannesburg, South Africa.[144]
Balkrishna Gokhale argues that Gandhi took his philosophy of history from Hinduism and Jainism, supplemented by selected Christian traditions and ideas of Tolstoy and Ruskin. Hinduism provided central concepts of God's role in history, of man as the battleground of forces of virtue and sin, and of the potential of love as an historical force. From Jainism, Gandhi took the idea of applying nonviolence to human situations and the theory that Absolute Reality can be comprehended only relatively in human affairs.[145]
Historian Howard Spodek argues for the importance of the culture of Gujarat in shaping Gandhi's methods. Spodek finds that some of Gandhi's most effective methods such as fasting, noncooperation and appeals to the justice and compassion of the rulers were learned as a youth in Gujarat. Later on, the financial, cultural, organizational and geographical support needed to bring his campaigns to a national audience were drawn from Ahmedabad and Gujarat, his Indian residence 1915–1930.[146]



                                   X
                          THE LOOMING SAILBOAT


Though favored by the weather most of the time for several days in
succession, the brothers went ahead but slowly. The discovery of the worn
moccasin and the stained tunic had raised their hopes of finding the
wrecked bateau soon. At any moment they might come upon it. Accordingly
they were even more vigilant than before, anxiously scanning every foot
of open shore, bay, cove, stream mouth and island.

One evening before sunset, they reached a beautiful bay with small
islands and wooded shores, where they caught sight of a group of bark
lodges. Blaise proposed that they land and bargain for provisions. There
proved to be about a dozen Indians in the encampment, men, squaws and
children. Luckily two deer and a yearling moose had been killed the day
before, and Blaise, after some discussion in Ojibwa, succeeded in
obtaining a piece of fresh venison and another of moose meat. The Indians
refused Hugh’s offer of payment in money, preferring to exchange the meat
for ammunition for their old, flint-lock muskets. They were from the deep
woods of the interior, unused to frequenting trading posts, and with no
idea of money, but they understood the value of powder and shot.

To one of the men Blaise spoke of having seen the outlaw Ohrante. The
Ojibwa replied that he had heard Ohrante had come from his hiding place
seeking vengeance on those who had captured him. He had never seen the
giant Iroquois, the man said, but he had heard that it was through his
great powers as a medicine man that he had escaped from his captors.
Without divulging that he was the son of the man who had led the
expedition against Ohrante, Blaise asked the Indian if he knew when and
where the outlaw had first been seen since his exile.

“I was told he was here at this Bay of the Beaver late in the Moon of the
Snow Crust,” the Ojibwa replied, and the boy’s hazel eyes gleamed.

Not until they had made camp did Blaise tell Hugh of the information he
had received.

“In the Moon of the Snow Crust!” the latter cried. “That is February or
March, isn’t it? And it was late in March that father died!”

The younger boy nodded. “Ohrante killed him, that I believe. Some day,
some day——” Blaise left the sentence unfinished, but his elder brother
had no doubt of the meaning. Hugh’s heart, like the younger lad’s, was
hot against his father’s murderer, but he remembered the powerful figure
of the Iroquois standing out dark against the dawn. How and when would
the day come?

After thoroughly exploring the Bay of the Beaver that night, the boys
were off shortly after dawn the next morning. Just as the sun was coming
up, reddening the white mist that lay upon the gently rippling water,
they paddled out of the bay. As they rounded the southern point, Blaise
uttered a startled exclamation.

Hugh, in the stern, looked up from his paddle. “A ship!” he cried.

Coming directly towards them, the light breeze scarce filling her sail,
was a ship. So high she loomed through the morning mist Hugh thought she
must be at least as large as the _Otter_, though she seemed to have but
one square sail. What was a ship doing here, so far south of the
Kaministikwia and even of the Grand Portage? Did she belong to some of
the Yankee traders who were now invading the Superior region? Hugh knew
he had been in United States waters ever since passing the mouth of the
Pigeon River.

And then, as the canoe and the ship approached one another, a curious
thing happened. The ship shrank. She was no longer as large as the
_Otter_. She was much smaller. She was not a ship at all, only a wooden
boat with a sail. There was something about the light and the atmospheric
conditions, the rising sun shining through the morning mist, that had
deceived the eye and caused the approaching craft to appear far taller
than it really was.

The sailboat was coming slowly in the light wind. As the boys paddled
past, they saw it was a small, flat-sided, wooden boat pointed at both
ends. It was well loaded and carried three men. Hugh shouted a greeting
and an inquiry. A tall fellow in blanket coat and scarlet cap, who was
steering, replied in a big, roaring voice and bad French, that they were
from the Fond du Lac bound for the Kaministikwia.

Blaise had been even more amazed than Hugh at the deceptive appearance of
the sailboat. When they landed later to inspect a stream mouth, the
half-breed said seriously that some spirit of the lake must have been
playing tricks with them. He wondered if one of the men aboard that
bateau was using magic.

“I doubt that,” Hugh answered promptly. “I think the queer light, the
sunrise through the mist, deceived our eyes and made the boat look
taller. Once on the way from Michilimackinac to the Sault, we saw
something like that. A small, bare rock ahead of us stretched up like a
high island. The Captain said he had seen the same thing before in that
very same spot. He called it ‘looming,’ but he did not think there was
anything magical about it.”

Blaise made no reply, but Hugh doubted if the lad had been convinced.

Several times during the rest of the trip down shore, the boys met canoes
loaded with trappers and traders or with families of Indians journeying
to the Grand Portage or to the New Fort. The two avoided conversation
with the strangers, as they did not care to answer questions about
themselves or their destination.

The journey was becoming wearisome indeed. The minuteness of the search
and the delays from bad weather prolonged the time. Moreover the store of
food was scant. The lads fished and hunted whenever possible without too
greatly delaying progress, but their luck was poor. Seldom were they able
to satisfy their hearty appetites. They lay down hungry under the stars
and took up their paddles at chilly dawn with no breakfast but a bit of
maple sugar. Hugh grew lean and brown and hard muscled. Except for the
redder hue of his tan, the light color of his hair and his gray eyes, he
might almost have been whole brother to Blaise. The older boy had become
expert with the paddle and could hold his own for any length of time and
at any pace the half-breed set. As a camper he was nearly the Indian
lad’s equal and he prided himself on being a better cook. It would take
several years of experience and wilderness living, however, before he
could hope to compete with his younger brother in woodcraft, weather
wisdom or the handling of a canoe in rough water.

As mile after mile of carefully searched shore line passed, without sign
of the wrecked bateau or trace of Jean Beaupré’s having come that way,
the boys grew more and more puzzled and anxious. Nevertheless they
persisted in their quest until they came at last to the Fond du Lac.

Fond du Lac means literally the “bottom of the lake,” but the name was
used by the early French explorers to designate the end or head of Lake
Superior, where the River St. Louis discharges and where the city of
Duluth now stands. To-day the name is no longer applied to the head of
the lake itself, but is restricted to the railway junction and town of
Fond du Lac several miles up the river. There was no town of Fond du Lac
or of Duluth in the days of this story. Wild, untamed, uninhabited, rose
the steep rock hills and terraces where part of the city now stands.

As they skirted the shore, the boys could see ahead of them a narrow line
stretching across the water to the southeast. That line was the long, low
point now known as Minnesota Point, a sand-bar that almost closes the
river mouth and served then, as it does now, to form a sheltered harbor.
Drawing nearer, they discovered that the long, sand point was by no means
bare, much of it being covered more or less thickly with bushes,
evergreens, aspens and willows. The two lads were weary, discouraged and
very hungry. Since their scanty breakfast of wild rice boiled with a
little fat, they had eaten nothing but a lump of sugar each, the last
remnant of their provisions. Nevertheless they paddled patiently along
the bar to the place where the river cut diagonally through it to reach
the lake. Entering the narrow channel, they passed through to absolutely
still water.

The sun was setting. Unless they went several miles farther to a trading
post or caught some fish, they must go to sleep hungry. They decided to
try the fishing. Luck with the lines had been poor throughout most of the
trip, but that night fortune favored the lads a little. In the shallower
water within the bar, they caught, in less than half an hour, two small,
pink-fleshed lake trout, which Hugh estimated at somewhat less than three
pounds each.

On the inner side of the point, the brothers ran their canoe upon the
sand beach. Then they kindled a fire and cooked their long delayed
supper. When the meal was over, nothing remained of the fish but heads,
fins, skin and bones.

Usually both fell asleep as soon as they were rolled in their blankets.
That night, on the low sand-bar, the mosquitoes came in clouds to the
attack, but it was not the annoying insects that kept the boys awake.
They wanted to talk over their situation.

“It seems,” Hugh said despondently, “that we have failed. That wrecked
boat must have been battered to pieces and washed out into the lake. Our
only chance of discovering the cache was to find the boat, and that
chance seems to be gone.”

“There is still one other chance, my brother,” Blaise replied quietly.
“Have you forgotten what we found at the River of Devil Tracks? We must
go back there and make search again.”

“You are right,” was Hugh’s quick rejoinder. “We didn’t find any sign of
the boat, yet it may once have been there or near by.”

Blaise nodded. “The bateau was perhaps driven on the bar at the river
mouth and afterwards washed out into the lake. We must make speed back
there. But, Hugh, if it was Ohrante who killed our father, he may also
have found the furs.”

“And carried them away.” Hugh slapped savagely at a mosquito. “I have
thought of that. I believe in my heart that Ohrante killed father. Yet
the murderer may not have taken the furs. Father told you he was wrecked
in a storm, and, unable to carry the furs with him, he hid them. That
much you say he made clear. When and where he was attacked we do not
know, but I believe it must have been after he cached the furs. When he
told of the wreck and the hiding of the pelts, he said nothing of his
wound?”

“Nothing then or afterwards of the wound or how he got it. He bade me
seek you out and find the furs and the packet. When I asked him how he
came by the hurt, he was beyond replying.”

Both boys were silent a moment listening to the howling of a lonely wolf
far off in the high hills to the north.

Then Hugh said emphatically, “We must go back and search every inch of
ground about that river. We will not give up while a chance remains of
finding the cache,” he added with stubborn determination.




                                   XI
                           THE FIRE-LIT ORGY


Before starting back the way they had come, the brothers had to have
provisions. Early the next morning they went up the St. Louis River.
Beyond the bar the river widened to two miles or more. In midstream the
current was strong, but Hugh steered into the more sluggish water just
outside the lily pads, reeds and grass of the low shore. About three
miles above the mouth, a village of bark lodges was passed, where
sharp-nosed dogs ran out to yelp and growl at the canoe.

A short distance beyond the Indian village stood the log fort and trading
post of the Old Northwest Company’s Fond du Lac station, one of several
posts that were still maintained in United States territory. The two boys
landed and attempted to buy provisions. Blaise was not known to the clerk
in charge, and Hugh, when asked, gave his middle name of MacNair. Jean
Beaupré had passed this post on his way down the river, and the lads did
not know what conversation or controversy he might have had with the Old
Company’s men. So they thought it wise to say nothing of their
relationship to the elder Beaupré. Brought up to be truthful and
straightforward, Hugh found it difficult to evade the clerk’s questions.
The older boy left most of the talking to the younger, who had his share
of the Indian’s wiliness and secretiveness. Blaise saw nothing wrong in
deceiving enemies and strangers in any way he found convenient. To Hugh,
brother and comrade, Blaise would have scorned to lie, but he did not
scruple to let the Northwest Company’s man think that he and Hugh were on
their way from the south shore to the Kaministikwia in the hope of taking
service with the Old Company.

The post could spare but little in the way of provisions. Less than a
half bushel of hulled corn, a few pounds of wild rice, left from the
supply brought the preceding autumn from the south shore, and a very
small piece of salt pork were all the clerk could be persuaded to part
with. As they were leaving he gave the boys a friendly warning.

“Watch out,” he said, “for an Iroquois villain and his band. They are
reported to be lingering along the north shore and they are a bad lot. He
used to be a hunter for the company, but he murdered a white man and is
an outcast now, a fugitive from justice. The rascal is called Ohrante. If
you catch sight of a huge giant of an Indian, lie low and get out of his
way as soon and as fast as you can.”

On the way back to the river mouth, the lads stopped at the Indian
village. After much bargaining in Ojibwa, Blaise secured a strip of dried
venison, as hard as a board, and a bark basket of sugar. To these people
the lad spoke of the warning the clerk had given him, but they could tell
him no more of the movements of Ohrante than he already knew.

The brothers were glad to get away from the Indian encampment and out on
the river again. The village was unkempt, and disgustingly dirty and ill
smelling. It was evident that most of the men and some of the squaws were
just recovering from a debauch on the liquor they had obtained from the
traders.

“They are ruining the Ojibwa people, those traders,” Blaise said angrily,
after the two had paddled a short distance down-stream. “Once an Ojibwa
gets the habit of strong drink, he will give all he has for it. The rival
companies contend for the furs, and each promises more and stronger
liquor than the other. So the evil grows worse and worse. In the end, as
our father said, it will ruin the Ojibwa altogether.”

Hugh did not reply for a moment, then he said hesitatingly, “Did father
buy pelts with drink?”

“Not the way most of the others do,” Blaise replied promptly. “Liquor he
had to give sometimes, as all traders must, now the custom is started,
but our father gave only a little at a time and not strong. Whenever he
could he bought his furs with other things. Always he was a friend to the
Ojibwa. He became one of us when he married into the nation, and he was a
good son, not like some white men who take Ojibwa wives. Many friends he
had, and some enemies, but few dared stand against him. He was a strong
man and a true one.”

Blaise spoke proudly. Once again Hugh, though glad to hear so much good
of his adventurous father, felt a pang of jealousy that the half-breed
boy should have known and loved him so well.

Departure was delayed by rain and a brisk wind from the lake, that swayed
and bent the trees on the exposed bar, drove the waves high on the outer
shore and blew the sand into food and cooking fire. Not until late
afternoon of the next day did Hugh and Blaise succeed in getting away.
They paddled till midnight and, determined to make the greatest possible
speed up the shore, took but four hours’ rest. All the following day they
travelled steadily, then camped at a stream mouth and were away again at
dawn. Bad weather delayed them that day, however, and caused a late start
next morning. Eager to get ahead, they did not land to prepare food until
mid-afternoon. After the meal and a rest of not more than a half hour,
they resumed their paddles.

Even the going down of the sun did not persuade them to cease their
labor. There would be no moon till towards morning, but the brothers
paddled on through the darkening twilight. The wind was light, merely
rippling the water, and they wanted to get as far on their way as
possible.

Blaise, in the bow, was still steadily plying his blade, when, through
the blackness of the gathering night, he caught sight of a spark of
light. He uttered an exclamation and pointed to the light with his
paddle.

“A camp,” he said, speaking softly as if he feared being overheard even
at that distance. “It is best to avoid it.”

As they went on, the light grew stronger and brighter. A fire was blazing
in an open spot on an island or point. Tiny black figures became visible
against the flames. The sounds of shouts and yells were borne across the
water. Something out of the ordinary was going on. That was no mere
cooking fire, but a huge pile, the flames lighting up the land and water.
Around the blaze, the black figures were capering and yelling. Was it
some orgy of devils? Had the place where the fire burned been near the
Devil Track River, even Hugh might have thought this a feast of fiends.
But it was some miles away from the Devil Track. Moreover, his ears
assured him that the yells, sounding louder and louder, were from the
throats of men, not of spirits.

Blaise had been considering his whereabouts. With the Indian’s keen sense
of location and accurate memory of ground he has been over, he had
concluded that the place where the fire burned was the rocky end of an
island he remembered passing on the way down. The island lay close in,
only a narrow waterway separating it from the heavily wooded main shore
where trees grew down to the water’s edge.

Paddles dipped and raised noiselessly, the canoe slipped through the
water. Blaise set the pace, and Hugh kept the craft close in the shadow
of the wooded mainland. As they drew nearer the island, Blaise raised his
blade and held it motionless. Hugh immediately did the same. The canoe,
under good headway, slipped by, without a sound that could be
distinguished from the rippling of the water on the rocks of the island.
Hidden in the blackness beyond the circle of wavering firelight, the two
gazed on a fear-inspiring scene.

Close to the leaping flames, lighted clearly by the glare, rose the white
stem of a tall birch. Tied to the tree was a man, his naked body red
bronze in the firelight and streaked with darker color. Five or six other
figures were leaping and yelling like fiends about the captive, darting
in on him now and again to strike a blow with club, knife or fire brand.
The meaning of the horrid scene was plain enough. An unlucky Indian
captive was being tortured to death.

It was not the tortured man, however, or the human fiends dancing about
him that held Hugh’s fascinated gaze. Motionless, arms folded, another
figure stood a little back from the fire, a towering form, gigantic in
the flickering light.

Paddles raised, rigid as statues, scarcely daring to breathe, the two
lads remained motionless until the slackening and swerving of their craft
made it necessary for Blaise to dip his blade cautiously. They were
beyond the fire now and still in the deep shadow of the overhanging
trees. But the waterway between shore and island was narrow. Until they
had put a greater distance between themselves and the hideous, fire-lit
picture, they could feel no assurance of security. Keeping close to
shore, they used the utmost caution. At last a bend in the mainland, with
a corresponding curve in the island, hid the fire from sight. Looking
back, they could still see the light of the flames through the trees and
on the water, but the blazing pile itself was hidden from view.

Even then the two boys relaxed their caution but little. Near exhaustion
though they were, they paddled on and on, with aching muscles and heads
nodding with sleep. Not until they were several miles away from the
island orgy of Ohrante and his band, did the brothers dare to land and
rest. Too weary to cook a meal, each ate a lump of maple sugar, sucked a
bit of the hard, unchewable, dried venison, rolled himself in his blanket
and slept.




                                  XII
                          THE HUNGRY PORCUPINE


Hugh was alone in a canoe struggling to make headway against the waves.
Bearing down upon him, with the roaring of the storm wind, was an
enormous black craft with a gigantic form towering in the bow and
menacing him with a huge knife. The boy was trying to turn his canoe, but
in spite of all his efforts, it kept heading straight for the terrifying
figure.

From somewhere far away a voice shouted, “Hugh, Hugh.” The shouts grew
louder. Hugh woke suddenly to find his half-brother shaking him by the
shoulder. Storm voices filled the air, wind roared through the trees,
surf thundered on the rocks. A big wave, curling up the beach, wet his
moccasins as he struggled to his feet.

Wide awake in an instant, Hugh seized his blanket and fled up over the
smooth, rounded pebbles out of reach of the waves. In a moment he
realized that Blaise was not with him. He looked back—and then he
remembered. The supplies, the canoe, where were they? He and his brother
had unloaded the canoe as usual the night before, had propped it up on
the paddles, and had crawled under it. But, overcome with weariness, they
had left the packets of food and ammunition lying where they had been
tossed, on the lower beach. Now, in the dull light of dawn, Hugh could
see the waves rolling in and breaking far above where the packages had
been dropped. The canoe had disappeared. It took him but a moment to
grasp all this. He ran back down the beach to join Blaise, who was
plunging in to his knees in the attempt to rescue what he could.

“The canoe?” Hugh shouted.

“Safe,” Blaise replied briefly, and made a dash after a retreating wave,
seizing a skin bag of corn just as it was floating away.

At the same instant Hugh caught sight of a packet of powder, and darted
after it, a bitter cold wave breaking over him just as he bent to snatch
the packet.

The two worked with frantic haste, heedless of the waves that soaked them
above the knees and sometimes broke clear over their heads as they
stooped to seize bag or package. They saved what they could, but the
dried meat, one sack of corn, Hugh’s bundle of extra clothing, the roll
of birch bark and the pine gum for repairing the canoe, had all gone out
into the lake. The maple sugar was partly dissolved. Some of the powder,
though the wrapping was supposed to be water-proof, was soaked, and
Hugh’s gun, which he had carelessly left with the other things, was so
wet it would have to be dried and oiled before it could be used. Blaise
had carried his gun to bed with him, and it was safe and dry.

Even the half-breed boy, who usually woke at the slightest sound, had
been so tired and had slept so heavily that the rising of the wind and
the pounding of the waves had not disturbed him. It was not until a
strong gust lifted the canoe from over his head, and a falling paddle
struck him sharply, that he woke. He had sprung up, seized the overturned
canoe and carried it to the shelter of a large rock. Then he had
returned, flung his gun and the paddles farther up the beach, and had
aroused the still sleeping Hugh.

When everything they had rescued had been carried beyond the reach of the
waves and placed in the lee of a rock out of the wind, the two boys
skirted the beach in the hope that the meat, corn or clothes might have
been cast up in some other spot. The beach, at the head of a small and
shallow cove, was not long. When Hugh had gone as far over pebbles and
boulders as he could, he scrambled up the rock point that bounded the
cove on the north and followed it to the end, without seeing anything of
the lost articles. As he reached the bare rock tip, the sun was just
coming up among red and angry clouds across the water, flushing with
crimson and orange the wildly heaving waves. The wind was a little east
of north. No rain had fallen where the boys were camped, but Hugh felt
sure from the clouds that a storm must have passed not many miles away.
The little cove being open and unprotected to the northeast, the full
force of the wind entered it and piled the waves upon the beach.

When Hugh returned to the camping place, he found that Blaise, who had
gone in the other direction, had had no better luck. The strong under
pull of the retreating waves had carried the lost articles out to deep
water.

Going on with the journey in such a blow was out of the question. The
boys made themselves as comfortable as possible behind a heap of boulders
out of the wind.

“I wish we knew in which direction Ohrante is bound,” Hugh said, as he
scraped the last morsel of his scanty portion of corn porridge from his
bark dish, with the crude wooden spoon he had carved for himself.

“He went up the shore as we came down,” Blaise replied. “He is probably
going down now. Somewhere he has met his enemies and has taken one
prisoner at least.”

“I wish we might have travelled farther before camping,” Hugh returned.

Blaise shrugged in his French fashion. “He cannot go on in this weather,
and we cannot either. Passing him last night was a great risk. I knew
that all their eyes would be blinded by the fire glare, so they could not
see into the shadows, else I should not have dared. All went well, yet we
must still be cautious and make but small fires and little smoke.”

“No column of smoke can ascend high enough in this gale to be seen,” Hugh
argued.

“But the smell will travel far, and the wind blows from us to them.
Caution is never wasted, my brother.”

Forced to discontinue the journey for most of the day, the lads spent the
time seeking food. They were far enough from Ohrante’s camp to have
little fear that any of his party would hear their shots, yet they chose
to hunt to the north rather than to the south. With some of the dry
powder and the shot that had been saved, Blaise started out first, while
Hugh spread the wet powder to dry on a flat rock exposed to the sun but
sheltered from the wind. Then he cleaned and dried his gun and greased it
with pork fat before leaving camp.

Hugh wandered the woods in search of game for several hours. He did not
go far back from shore. Traversing the thick woods, where there was much
undergrowth, was difficult and he did not greatly trust his own
woodcraft. He had no wish to humiliate himself in his half-brother’s eyes
by losing his way. Moreover, as long as he kept where the wind reached
him, he was not much annoyed by the mosquitoes, at their worst in June.
Whenever he reached a spot where the wind did not penetrate, the
irritating insects came about him in clouds, settling on his hands, face,
wrists and neck and even getting inside his rather low necked, deerskin
shirt.

Whether he did not go far enough into the woods or for some other reason,
his luck was not good. He shot a squirrel and a long-eared, northern hare
or snowshoe rabbit and missed another, but did not catch a glimpse of
deer, moose, or bear. Neither squirrel nor rabbit meat was at its best in
June, but it was at least better than no meat at all. Carrying his meager
bag, he returned late in the afternoon. He found Blaise squatting over a
small cooking fire. The iron kettle gave out a most appetizing odor. The
younger boy had secured three plump ruffed grouse. In the Lake Superior
wilderness of that day no laws prohibited the shooting of game birds out
of season. The stew which appealed so strongly to Hugh’s nostrils was
made up of grouse and squirrel meat, with a very little salt pork to give
it savor.

The wind had fallen and since noon the waves had been going down. By
sunset, though the lake was by no means smooth, travel had become
possible for skilled canoeists. Had Hugh and Blaise not been in such a
hurry to put distance between themselves and Ohrante, they would have
waited until morning. They were so anxious to go on that they launched
the canoe while the afterglow was still reflected in pink and lavender on
the eastern sky. A few miles would bring them to the Devil Track River,
but, not choosing to camp in that evil spot, Blaise insisted on landing
about a mile below the stream mouth.

Leaving their camp early next morning, the two started overland to the
Devil Track. All day long they sought for some trace of the hidden cache.
Not until after sunset did they cease their efforts. Weary and
disheartened they returned to their camping place, Hugh in the lead. They
had left the canoe turned bottom up over their supplies and well
concealed by a thicket of red-stemmed osier dogwoods. The elder brother’s
sharp exclamation when he reached the spot made the younger one hasten to
his side.

“Look!” cried Hugh, pointing to the birch craft.

Blaise did not need to be told to look. The ragged, gaping hole in the
bark was too conspicuous. “A porcupine,” he exclaimed.

“It was the devil in the form of a porcupine, I think,” Hugh muttered.
“What possessed the beast?”

“He smelled the pork and gnawed his way through to it. The porcupine
loves all things salt. We will see.”

Blaise was right. When the canoe was lifted, the boys discovered that the
small chunk of salt pork was gone, taken out through the hole the beast
had gnawed. Nothing else was missing.

“Either he didn’t like the other things or the pork was all he could
carry away at one trip,” said Hugh. “If we had stayed away a little
longer, he might have made off with the corn and the sugar as well.”

“The loss of the pork is bad,” Blaise commented gravely. “The hole in the
canoe is bad also, and we must delay to mend it.”

The loss of the pork was indeed serious. The rabbit and the squirrel Hugh
had shot the day before had been eaten, and nothing else remained but a
few handfuls of corn and a little sugar. So once more, after setting some
snares, the lads went to sleep supperless. They slept with the corn and
sugar between them for protection.

Blaise might have suspected that the fiend of the river had put a spell
on his snares, for in the morning he found them all empty. The dry, stony
ground showed no tracks. If any long-legged hare had come that way, he
had been wary enough to avoid the nooses.

After the scantiest of breakfasts the boys set about repairing the canoe.
Luckily the ball of wattap, the fine, tough roots of the spruce prepared
for use as thread, had not been lost when the waves covered the beach at
their former camp. From a near-by birch Blaise cut a strong, smooth piece
of bark without knotholes. With his knife he trimmed the ragged edges of
the hole. Having softened and straightened his wattap by soaking it, he
sewed the patch on neatly, using a large steel needle he had bought at
the trading post at the Kaministikwia.

In the meantime Hugh sought a pine grove up the river, where he obtained
some chunks of resin. The resin he softened with heat to a sticky gum and
applied it to the seams and stitches. Blaise went over them again with a
live coal held in a split stick, and spread the softened resin skillfully
with thumb and knife blade. Then the canoe was left bottom side up for
the gum to dry and harden.

In spite of the fact that the boys, on their way down the shore, had
searched the land to the east of the Devil Track with considerable
thoroughness, they were determined to go over it again. By means of a
fallen tree and the boulders that rose above the foaming rapids, they
crossed the river where it narrowed between rock walls. Late in the
afternoon, Blaise, scrambling up a steep and stony slope well back from
the stream, heard two shots in quick succession and then a third at a
longer interval, the signal agreed upon to indicate that one or the other
had come across something significant. The sounds came from the direction
of the lake, and Blaise hastened down to the shore.




                                  XIII
                           THE PAINTED THWART


Blaise found Hugh stooping over a heap of shattered, water-stained
boards, crude planks, axe hewn from the tree.

“Can this be the boat, do you think?” Hugh asked.

Blaise shook his head doubtfully. “It was not here on the beach when we
came this way before.”

“Yet it may be part of the wreck washed from some outer rock and cast
here by that last hard blow,” reasoned the older boy.

“That is possible. If we could find more of it, the part that bears the
sign——”

“What sign? You told me of no sign. I have often wondered how, if we
found a wrecked boat, we should know whether it was the right one.”

“Surely I told you of the sign. The board that bears the hole for the
mast is painted with vermilion, and on it in black is our father’s sign,
the figure that means his Ojibwa name, ‘man with the bright eyes, the
eyes that make sparks.’ Twice the sign is there, once on each side of the
mast.”

Hugh was staring at his younger brother. Black figures on a vermilion
ground! Where had he seen such a thing, seen it recently, since he left
the Sault? Then he remembered. “Show me, Blaise,” he cried, “what that
figure looks like, that means father’s Indian name.”

Blaise picked up a smooth gray flake and with a bit of softer, dark red
stone scratched the figure.

“That is it,” Hugh exclaimed. “I have seen that wrecked boat, a bateau
with the thwart painted red and that very same figure drawn in black.”

“You have seen it?” The younger brother looked at the elder wonderingly.
“In your dreams?”

“No, I was wide awake, but it was a long way from here and before ever I
saw you, Blaise.” Rapidly Hugh related how he and Baptiste had examined
the old bateau in the cleft of the rocks of the Isle Royale.

Blaise listened in silence, only his eyes betraying his interest. “Truly
we know not where to search,” he said when Hugh had finished. “The bateau
drifted far. How can we find where it went upon the rocks?”

“I don’t believe it drifted far. If it was so badly damaged father had to
abandon it, could it have floated far? Surely it would have gone to the
bottom. When that boat was carried across to Isle Royale, I believe
father and Black Thunder were still in it with all their furs. The storm
drove them out into the lake, they lost their bearings, just as we in the
_Otter_ did. They were borne away and dashed by the waves into that crack
in the rocks. Near there somewhere we shall find the cache, if we find it
at all.”

Hugh spoke confidently, very sure of his own reasoning, but the younger
lad was not so easily convinced.

“How,” Blaise questioned, “did he come away from that island Minong if he
was wrecked there? He could not come by land and the bateau is still
there.”

“He made himself a dugout or birch canoe to cross in when the weather
cleared.”

“But then why came he not to Wauswaugoning by canoe?”

“Because,” persisted Hugh, “when he reached the mainland he fell in with
some enemy here at the Devil Track River. We know his wound was not
received in the wreck. You yourself say it was a knife wound. Black
Thunder wasn’t killed in the wreck either. They escaped unharmed but the
bateau was beyond repair. So they built a canoe and crossed to this
shore. Here they were set upon and Black Thunder was killed and father
sorely wounded.”

Again the sceptical Blaise shook his head. “Why were they away down here
so far below the Grand Portage? And why, if they had a canoe, brought
they not the furs and the packet with them?”

Hugh was aware of the weak links in his theory, yet he clung to it.
“Maybe they did bring them,” he said, “but couldn’t carry them overland,
so they hid them.”

“No, no. Our father told me that the furs were not far from the wreck. He
said that three or four times. I cannot be mistaken.”

“Perhaps their canoe wasn’t big enough to hold all of the pelts,” Hugh
speculated. “What they did bring may have fallen into Ohrante’s hands. So
father spoke only of the rest, hidden in a secret place near the wreck.
To me that seems reasonable enough. But,” he admitted honestly, “I don’t
quite understand how they came to be so far down the shore here, and, if
the packet is valuable, why didn’t father bring that with him if he
brought anything? And why didn’t he tell you that the storm drove him on
Isle Royale?”

“You forget,” Blaise said slowly, “that our father’s body was very weak
and his spirit just about to leave it. I asked him where to find the
bateau. He told me of the way it was marked, but he could say no more. I
think he could not hear my questions.”

Both lads were silent for several minutes, then Hugh said decisively,
“Well, Blaise, there are just two things we can do, unless we give up the
quest entirely. We can go back down the shore, searching the land for
some sign of the cache, or we can cross to Isle Royale, find the cleft in
the rocks where the bateau lies, and seek there for the furs and the
packet. I am for the latter plan. To search the whole shore from here to
the Fond du Lac for a hidden cache to which we have no clue seems to me a
hopeless task.”

“But to cross that long stretch of open water in a small canoe,” Blaise
returned doubtfully.

“We must choose good weather of course, and paddle our swiftest to reach
the island before a change comes. Perhaps we can rig some kind of sail
and make better time than with our paddles.”

It was plain that Hugh had made up his mind to return to Isle Royale.
Hitherto he had been content to let Blaise take the lead, but now he was
asserting his elder brother’s right to leadership. Better than his white
brother, Blaise understood the hazards of such an undertaking, but the
half-breed lad was proud. He was not going to admit himself less
courageous than his elder brother. If Hugh dared take the risk, he,
Little Caribou, as his mother’s people called him, dared take it also.

The brothers must provision themselves for the trip. Even if they reached
the island safely and in good time, they could not guess how long their
search might take, or how many days or weeks they might be delayed before
they could return. Fresh supplies might have reached the Grand Portage by
now and corn at least could be bought. From the Indians always to be
found near the posts, other food supplies and new moccasins might be
obtained.

Considering food supplies reminded the lads of their hunger. They decided
to devote the remaining hours of daylight to fishing for their supper.
They would start for the Grand Portage in the morning. Blaise paddled
slowly along a submerged reef some distance out from shore, while Hugh
fished.

In a very few minutes he felt a pull at his line. Hand over hand he
hauled it in, Blaise helping by managing the canoe so that the line did
not slacken even for an instant. Nearer and nearer Hugh drew his prize,
until he could see the gleaming silver of the big fish flashing through
the clear water. Then came the critical moment. He had no landing net,
and reaching over the side with net or gaff would have been a risk at
best. Without shifting his weight enough to destroy the balance, while
Blaise endeavored to hold the canoe steady with his paddle, Hugh must
land his fish squarely in the bottom. With a sudden swing, the long,
silvery, dark-flecked body, tail wildly flapping, was raised from the
water and flung into the canoe. Almost before it touched the bottom, Hugh
had seized his knife and dealt a swift blow. A few ineffectual flaps and
the big fish lay still.

“Fifteen pounds at least,” Hugh exulted. “I have seen larger trout, but
most of them were taken in nets.”

“They grow very big sometimes, two, three times as big, but it is not
good to catch such a big one with a line. Unless you have great luck, it
overturns your canoe.”

The sight of the big trout sharpened the boys’ hunger pangs and took away
all zest from further fishing. They paddled full speed for shore and
supper.

Favored by good weather they made a quick trip to the Grand Portage. In
the bay a small ship lay at anchor, and they knew supplies must have
arrived.

“That is not the _Otter_,” Hugh remarked as they paddled by.

“No, it is not one of the Old Company’s ships. I think it belongs to the
New Company.”

“I’m glad it isn’t the _Otter_,” Hugh replied. “I shouldn’t know how to
answer Baptiste’s questions.”

The ship proved, as Blaise had guessed, to belong to the New Company. She
sailed the day after the boys arrived, but had left ample supplies. They
had no difficulty in buying the needed stores, though Hugh’s money was
exhausted by the purchases. He left explanations to Blaise, confident
that his younger brother could not be persuaded to divulge the
destination or purpose of their trip.

Again bad weather held the lads at the Grand Portage and Wauswaugoning.
The last day of their stay, when they were returning from the New
Company’s post, they came upon the camp of the trappers whose bateau had
loomed like a ship through the morning mist when the boys were leaving
the Bay of the Beaver. Hugh recognized at once the tall fellow in the
scarlet cap who had replied to his shout of greeting. The trappers had
disposed of their furs at the Old Company’s post and were about to leave.
They were going to portage their supplies to Fort Charlotte above the
falls of the Pigeon River and go up the river in a canoe. Hugh inquired
what they intended to do with their small bateau which was drawn up on
the shore.

“You want it?” the leader questioned in his big voice.

“Will you sell it?” the boy asked eagerly.

The man nodded. “What you give?”

Hugh flushed with chagrin, remembering that all his money was gone.
Blaise came to the rescue by offering to trade some ammunition for the
boat. The man shook his head. Blaise added to his offer a small quantity
of food supplies, but still the fellow refused. “Too little,” he
grumbled, then added something in his curious mixture of Scotch-English
and Ojibwa. He was a Scotch half-breed and Hugh found his dialect
difficult to understand.

Blaise shrugged, walked over to the boat and examined it. He turned
towards the man and spoke in rapid Ojibwa. The fellow answered in the
same tongue, pointing to the lad’s gun.

“What does he say?” asked Hugh.

“I told him his bateau needs mending,” Blaise answered in French, “but he
will not trade for anything but my gun, which is better than his. I will
not give him the gun. Our father gave it to me.”

Hugh understood his half-brother’s feeling, but he was eager to secure
the boat. “He may have my gun,” he whispered. He knew that the tall
fellow understood some French. “Tell him if he will include the sail—he
had one, you know—I’ll give him my gun and some ammunition. Mine doesn’t
shoot as accurately as yours, but it looks newer.”

Blaise made the offer in Ojibwa, Hugh repeated it in English, and after
an unsuccessful attempt to get more, the man agreed. He put into the boat
the mast and canvas, which he had been using as a shelter, and Hugh
handed over the gun and ammunition.

The rest of the day was spent in making a few necessary repairs to the
bateau, and the following morning, before a light southwest breeze, the
lads set sail. Blaise knew nothing of this sort of water travel, but Hugh
had handled a sailboat before, though never one quite so clumsy as this
crude, heavy bateau. The boat was pointed at both ends, flat bottomed and
built of thick, hand-hewn boards. It carried a small, square sail on a
stubby mast. With axe and knife Hugh had made a crude rudder and had
lashed it to the stern in the place of the paddle the trappers had been
content to steer with. Blaise quickly learned to handle the rudder,
leaving Hugh free to manage the sail. It was a satisfaction to the older
boy to find something in which he excelled his younger brother and could
take the lead. It restored his self-respect as the elder. Blaise, on the
other hand, obeyed orders instantly and proved himself as reliable a
subordinate as he had been leader. The breeze holding steady, the bateau
made fairly good speed. They might possibly have made better time in a
canoe, but the new mode of travel was a pleasant change from the constant
labor of plying the blades.

Had the lads but known it, their wisest course would have been to cross
directly from the Grand Portage to the southwestern end of Isle Royale
and then skirt the island to its northeast tip. But they had no map to
tell them this. Indeed in those days the position of Isle Royale was but
imperfectly understood. It had been visited by scarcely any white men and
was avoided by the Indians. During the boys’ detention at the Grand
Portage, rain and fog had rendered the island, some eighteen or twenty
miles away, invisible. The day they set sail the sky was blue overhead,
but there was still haze enough on the water to obscure the distance. It
was not strange that they believed Isle Royale farther off than it really
was. From its northeastern end the _Otter_ had sailed to the
Kaministikwia, and Hugh took for granted that the shortest way to reach
the island must be from some point on Thunder Bay. He was aware of the
deep curve made by the shore to form the great bay, and realized that to
follow clear around that curve would be a loss of time. Instead of
turning north to follow the shore, he held on to the northeast, along the
inner side of a long line of narrow, rocky islands and reefs, rising from
the water like the summits of a mountain chain and forming a breakwater
for the protection of the bay.

It was from one of those islands, now called McKellar Island, south about
two miles from the towering heights of the Isle du Paté and at least
fifteen miles by water from the southern mouth of the Kaministikwia, that
the adventurers finally set out for Isle Royale. Before they dared
attempt the perilous sail across the long stretch of the open lake, they
remained in camp a day to let the southwest wind, which had risen to half
a gale, blow itself out. Wind they needed for their venture, but not too
much wind.




                                  XIV
                      SAILING TOWARDS THE SUNRISE


“Truly the spirit of the winds favors us.” Blaise forgot for the moment
his Christian training and spoke in the manner of his Indian forefathers.
He had waked at dawn and, finding the lake merely rippled by a steady
west breeze, had aroused Hugh.

So anxious were the two to take advantage of the perfect weather that
they did not wait for breakfast, but hastily flung their blankets and
cooking utensils into the boat. With the two strong paddles included in
the purchase, they ran the bateau out of the little cove where it had
lain sheltered. Then, hoisting the sail, they steered towards the dawn.

Hugh Beaupré never forgot that sail into the sunrise. Ahead of him the
sky, all rose and gold and faint green blending into soft blue, met the
water without the faintest, thinnest line of land between. Before and
around the boat, the lake shimmered with the reflected tints that
glorified even the patched and dirty sail. Was he bound for the other
side of the world, for some glorious, unearthly realm beyond that
gleaming water? A sense of mingled dread and exultation swept over the
boy, his face flushed, his gray eyes sparkled, his pulse quickened. He
knew the feeling of the explorer setting out for new lands, realms of he
knows not what perils and delights.

The moment of thrill passed, and Hugh turned to glance at Blaise. The
younger boy, his hand on the tiller rope, sat like a statue, his dark
face tense, his shining hazel eyes betraying a kindred feeling to that
which had held Hugh in its thrall. Never before in all their days of
journeying together had the white lad and the half-breed felt such
perfect comradeship. Speech was unnecessary between them.

As the sun rose higher and the day advanced, Blaise was not so sure that
fortune was favoring the venture. The wind sank until the water was
broken by the merest ripple only. There was scarcely enough pressure
against the sail to keep the boat moving.

“At this rate we shall be a week in reaching the island,” said Hugh,
anxiously eying the canvas. “We can go faster with the paddles. Lash the
rudder and we’ll try the blades.”

For the first time since they had changed from canoe to sailboat Blaise
voiced an objection. “To paddle this heavy bateau is hard work,” he said.
“We cannot keep at it all day and all night, as we could in a bark canoe.
As long as the wind blows at all and we move onward, even slowly, we had
best save our strength. Soon we shall need it. Before the sun is
overhead, there will be no wind at all, and then we must paddle.”

Hugh nodded agreement, but, less patient than his half-brother, he found
it trying to sit idle waiting for the gentle breeze to die. Blaise had
prophesied truly. Before noon the sail was hanging loose and idle, the
water, blue under a cloudless sky, was without a wrinkle. It is not often
really hot on the open waters of Lake Superior, but that day the sun
glared down upon the little boat, and the distance shimmered with heat
haze. The bateau had no oars or oarlocks, only two stout paddles, and
paddling the heavy, clumsy boat was slow, hot work.

Pausing for a moment’s rest after an hour’s steady plying of his blade,
Hugh uttered an exclamation. “Look, Blaise,” he cried. “We haven’t so far
to go. There is the Isle Royale ahead, and not far away either.”

He pointed with his blade to the hazy blue masses across the still water.
High the land towered, with points and bays and detached islands.
Encouraged by the sight, the two bent to their paddles.

In a few minutes Hugh cried out again. “How strange the island looks,
Blaise! I don’t remember any flat-topped place like that. See, it looks
as if it had been sliced off with a knife.”

The distant shore had taken on a strange appearance. High towering land
it seemed to be, but curiously level and flattened at the top, like no
land Hugh had seen around Lake Superior.

“There is something wrong,” the boy went on, puzzled. “We must be off our
course. That is not Isle Royale, at least not the part I saw. Where are
we, Blaise? Are we going in the wrong direction? Can that be part of the
mainland?”

“It is not the mainland over that way,” Blaise made prompt reply. “It
must be some part of Minong.” He used the Indian name for the island.

“But I saw nothing the——” Hugh began, then broke off to cry out, “Look,
look, the island is changing before our eyes! It towers up there to the
right, and over there, where it was high a moment ago, it shrinks and
fades away!”

“It is some enchanted land,” the younger boy murmured, gazing in wonder
at the dim blue shapes that loomed in one place, shrank in another,
changed size and form before his awestruck eyes. “It is a land of
spirits.” He ceased his paddling to cross himself.

For a moment Hugh too was inclined to believe that he and his brother
were the victims of witchcraft. But, though not free from superstition,
he had less of it than the half-breed. Moreover he remembered the looming
of the very boat he was now in, when he had first seen it in the mists of
dawn, and also the rock that had looked like an island, when he was on
his way from Michilimackinac. The captain of the ship had told him of
some of the queer visions called mirages he had seen when sailing the
lakes. Turning towards Blaise, Hugh attempted to explain the strange
sight ahead.

“It is the mirage. I have heard of it. The Captain of the _Athabasca_
told me that the mirage is caused by the light shining through mist or
layers of cloud or air that reflect in some way we do not understand,
making images of land appear where there is no land or changing the
appearance of the real land. Sometimes, he said, images of islands are
seen upside down in the sky, above the real water-line. It is all very
strange and no one quite understands why it comes or how, but there is no
enchantment about it, Blaise.”

The younger boy nodded, his eyes still on the changing, hazy shapes
ahead. Without reply, he resumed his paddling. How much he understood of
his elder brother’s explanation, Hugh could not tell. At any rate Blaise
was too proud to show further fear of something Hugh did not seem to be
afraid of.

In silence the two plied their paddles under the hot sun, but the heavy
wooden boat did not respond like a bark canoe to their efforts. Progress
was very slow. White clouds were gathering in the south, moving slowly up
and across the sky, though the water remained quiet. The clouds veiled
the sun. The distant land shrank to a mere blue line, its natural shape
and size, and seemed to come no nearer for all their efforts. Both boys
were growing anxious. After the heat and stillness of the day, the
clouds, slow moving though they were, threatened storm. The two dug their
blades into the water, straining muscles of arms and shoulders to put all
their strength into the stroke.

A crinkle, a ripple was spreading over the green-blue water. A breeze was
coming up from the southwest. Hugh laid down his blade to raise the sail.
In the west the rays of the setting sun were breaking through the clouds
and dyeing them crimson, flame and orange. He was glad to see the sun
again, for it brought him assurance that he was keeping the course, not
swinging too far to north or south.

The breeze, very light at first, strengthened after sunset and became
more westerly, the most favorable direction. The clumsy boat and square
sail could not be made to beat against the wind, but Hugh’s course was a
little north of east. He could sail directly with the wind and yet be
assured of not going far out of his way. The farthest tip of land ahead,
now freed from the false distortions of mirage, he took to be the end of
the long, high shore, where, in the fissure, he and Baptiste had found
the old bateau. That land was still very far away, other islands or
points of the main island lying nearer.

As darkness gathered, the breeze swept away the clouds, and stars and
moon shone out. Sailing over the gently heaving water, where the
moonlight made a shimmering path, was a pleasant change from paddling the
heavy boat in the heat of the day. The boys’ evening meal consisted of a
few handfuls of hulled corn and some maple sugar, with the clear, cold
lake water for drink. Both Blaise at the tiller and Hugh handling the
sheet found it difficult to keep awake. The day had been a long one, but
they must remain alert to hold their course and avoid disaster.

They were approaching land now. In the moonlight, to avoid islands and
projecting rocks was not difficult. Sunken reefs were harder to discern.
Only the breaking of waves upon the rocks that rose near to the surface
betrayed the danger. So the steersman shunned points and the ends of
islands from which hidden reefs might run out. Hugh would have been glad
to camp on the first land reached, but he knew he ought to take advantage
of the favorable wind and get as near as possible to the spot where the
wreck lay. Shaking off his drowsiness, he gave his whole attention to
navigation.

Several islands and a number of points, that might belong either to the
great island or to smaller bordering ones, were passed before reaching a
low shore, well wooded, which Hugh felt sure he recognized. He remembered
that the _Otter_ had been obliged to go far out around the tip to avoid a
long reef. He warned Blaise to steer well out, but the latter did not go
quite far enough and the boat grazed a rock. No damage was done, however.
The bateau was now headed for a strip of much higher land, showing dark
between sky and water. Hugh thought that must be the towering,
tree-crowned, rock shore he recalled. To land there tonight was out of
the question. The moon had gone down, and to run, in the darkness, up the
bay to the spot where the _Otter_ had taken shelter might also prove
difficult. Hugh decided they had better tie up somewhere on the point
they had just rounded. He lowered the sail and both boys took up their
paddles. For some distance they skirted the steep, slanting rock shore
where the trees grew down as far as they could cling.

One mountain ash had lost its footing and fallen into the lake. To the
fallen tree Hugh tied the boat, in still water and under the shadow of
the shore. Then he and Blaise rolled themselves in their blankets and lay
down in the bottom. Heedless of the dew-wet planking they were asleep
immediately. The water rippled gently against the rough sides of the
boat, an owl in a spruce sent forth its eerie hoots, from across the
water a loon answered with a wild, mocking cry, but the tired lads slept
on undisturbed.




                                   XV
                          THE RIFT IN THE ROCK


The brothers were in the habit of waking early, but it had been nearly
dawn when they lay down, and, in the shadow of the trees, they slept
until the sun was well started on his day’s journey. When they did wake,
Hugh’s first glance was towards the land across the water.

There was no mistaking that high towering shore, steep rocks at the base,
richly forest clad above. It was the same shore he had seen weeks before,
the first time dimly through fog and snow, again clear cut and distinct,
when he and Baptiste had rowed Captain Bennett out of the bay, and yet a
third time from the deck of the _Otter_ as she sailed away towards
Thunder Cape.

“We have come aright, Blaise,” said Hugh with satisfaction. “That is the
place we seek, and it can’t be more than a mile away. Do you see that
spot where the trees come to the water, that tiny break in the rocks? It
is a little cove with a bit of beach, and in that stretch of rocks to the
left is the crack where the old boat lies. I’m sure of the spot, because
from the _Otter_, when we were leaving, I noticed the bare rock pillars
of that highest ridge away up there, like the wall of a fort among the
trees. It doesn’t show quite so plainly now the birches are in leaf, but
I’m sure it is the same. There are two little coves almost directly below
that pillared rock wall, and the cliff is a little farther to the left.
Oh, but I am hungry,” he added. “We must have a good breakfast before we
start across.”

Over the short stretch of water that separated the low point from the
high shore, the bateau sailed before the brisk wind. The stretch of gray,
pillared rock, like the wall of a fortress, high up among the greenery,
served as a guide. As the boat drew nearer, the twin coves, shallow
depressions in the shore line separated by a projecting mass of rock,
came clear to view.

“Steer for the cliff just beyond the left hand cove,” Hugh ordered.
“We’ll run in close and then turn.”

Blaise obediently steered straight for the mass of rock with the vertical
fissures, as if his purpose were to dash the boat against the cliff. As
they drew close, Hugh gave a shout.

The crack had come into view, a black rift running at an angle into the
cliff. As the boat swung about to avoid going on the rocks, the younger
boy’s quick eye caught a glimpse, in that dark fissure, of the end of a
bateau. To give him that glimpse, Hugh had taken a chance of wrecking
their own boat. Now he was obliged to act quickly, lowering the sail and
seizing a paddle.

In the trough of the waves, they skirted, close in, the steep, rugged
rocks. Almost hidden by a short point was the bit of beach at the end of
the first of the twin coves. With a dexterous twist of the paddles, the
boys turned their boat and ran up on the beach. Landing with so much
force would have ground the bottom out of a birch canoe, but the heavy
planks of the bateau would stand far worse battering.

The appearance of the cove had changed greatly since that day when Hugh
and Baptiste had rowed past. Then the bushes, birches and mountain ash
trees that ringed the pebbles had been bare limbed. Now, with June more
than two-thirds gone, they were all in full leaf. Big clusters of buds
among the graceful foliage of the mountain ashes were almost ready to
open into handsome flowers. The high-bush cranberries bore white blossoms
here and there, and the ninebark bushes were covered with masses of
pinkish buds. Though Hugh’s mind was on the wreck, his eyes took note of
the almost incredible difference a few weeks had made. His nose sniffed
with appreciation the spicy smell of the fresh, growing tips of the
balsams, mingled with the heliotrope-like odor of the tiny twin-flowers
blooming in the woods. He did not let enjoyment of these things delay
him, however.

“Now,” he cried, when he and Blaise had pulled up the boat, “we must get
into that crack. We can’t reach it from the water in this wind. Perhaps
we can climb down from the top.”

Up a steep rock slope, dotted with fresh green moss, shiny leaved
bearberry, spreading masses of juniper and a few evergreen trees growing
in the depressions, he hastened with Blaise close behind. Along the top
of the cliff they made their way until they reached the rift. Though the
sides of the crack were almost vertical, trees and bushes grew wherever
they could anchor a root. Through branches and foliage, the boys could
get no view of the old boat at the bottom.

“We must climb down,” said Hugh.

“It will be difficult,” Blaise replied doubtfully. “To do it we must
cling to the roots and branches. Those trees have little soil to grow in.
Our weight may pull them over.”

“We must get down some way,” Hugh insisted. “We shall have to take our
chances.”

“The wind and waves will calm. We have but to wait and enter from the
water.”

Hugh had not the Indian patience. “The wind is not going down, it is
coming up,” he protested. “It may blow for a week. I didn’t come here to
wait for calm weather. I’m going down some way.”

He wriggled between the lower branches of a spruce growing on the very
verge of the crack and let himself down a vertical wall, feeling with his
toes for a support. Carefully he rested his weight on the slanting stem
of a stunted cedar growing in a niche. It held him. Clinging with fingers
and moccasined feet to every projection of rock and each branch, stem or
root that promised to hold him, he worked his way down. He heeded his
younger brother’s warning in so far as to test every support before
trusting himself to it. But in spite of his care, a bit of projecting
rock crumbled under his feet. His weight was thrown upon a root he had
laid hold of. The root seemed to be firmly anchored, but it pulled loose,
and Hugh went sliding down right into the old boat. The ice, which had
filled the wreck when he first saw it, had melted. The bateau was more
than half full of water, into which he plumped, splashing it all over
him. He was not hurt, however, only wet and shaken up a bit.

Blaise had already begun to follow his elder brother into the cleft, when
he heard Hugh crash down. Halfway over the edge, the younger boy paused
for a moment. Then Hugh’s shout came up to him. “All right, but be
careful,” the elder brother cautioned.

Light and very agile, the younger lad had better luck, landing nimbly on
his feet on the cross plank of the old boat. It was the vermilion painted
thwart that had held the mast. Eagerly both lads bent over it to make
out, in the dim light, the black figures on the red ground.

“It is our father’s sign,” Blaise said quietly, “our father’s sign, just
as I have seen it many times. This was his bateau, but whether it was
wrecked here or elsewhere we cannot tell.”

“I believe it was wrecked here,” Hugh asserted. “See how the end is
splintered. This boat was driven upon these very rocks where it now lies,
the prow smashed and rents ripped in the bottom and one side. But it is
empty. We must seek some sign to guide us to the furs. We need more
light.”

“I will make a torch. Wait but a moment.”

Blaise straightened up, hooked his fingers over the edge of a narrow,
rock shelf, swung himself up, and ascended the rest of the way as nimbly
as a squirrel. In a few minutes he came scrambling down again, holding in
one hand a roughly made torch, resinous twigs bound together with a bit
of bearberry vine. With sparks from his flint and steel, he lighted the
balsam torch. It did not give a very bright light, but it enabled the
boys to examine the old bateau closely. The only mark they could find
that might have been intended as a guide was a groove across the fore
thwart. At one end of the groove short lines had been cut diagonally to
form an arrow point.

“The cache, if it is on the island, must be sought that way,” said
Blaise.

“The arrow surely points up the crack. We’ll follow it.”

The smashed bow of the boat was firmly lodged among the fragments of rock
upon which it had been driven. Over those fragments, up a steep slope,
the boys picked their way for a few yards, until the walls drew together,
the fissure narrowing to a mere slit. By throwing the light of the torch
into the slit and reaching in arm’s length, Hugh satisfied himself that
there were no furs there. Nevertheless the arrow pointed in that
direction. He looked about him. The left hand wall was almost
perpendicular, solid rock apparently, with only an occasional vertical
crack or shallow niche where some hardy bit of greenery clung. But from
the right wall several blocks had fallen out. On one of those blocks Hugh
was standing. He held the torch up at arm’s length.

“There’s a hole up there. Such a place would make a good cache.”

“Let me up on your shoulders,” Blaise proposed, “and I will look in.”

Sitting on Hugh’s shoulders, Blaise threw the light of the torch into the
hole. Then he reached in his arm. “There are no furs here,” he said.

Hugh had been almost certain he had found the cache. He was keenly
disappointed. “Are you sure?” he cried.

“Yes. It is a small place, just a hole in the rock. Let me down.”

“There are no furs there,” Blaise repeated, when he had jumped down from
Hugh’s shoulders. “But something I found.” He held out a short piece of
rawhide cord.

Hugh stared at the cord, then at his half-brother. “You were not the
first to visit that hole then. What is the meaning of this?” He took the
bit of rawhide in his fingers.

“I think it means that the furs have been there, but have been taken
away,” was the younger lad’s slow reply. “It is a piece from the thong
that bound a bale of furs. That is what I think.”

“Someone has found the cache and taken away the pelts.”

“I fear it,” agreed Blaise. Though he spoke quietly, his disappointment
was as strong as Hugh’s.

“That someone is probably one of the Old Company’s men. Then the furs are
lost to us indeed. Yet we do not know. How did anyone learn of the cache?
It may have been Black Thunder of course, but then what was the meaning
of the blood-stained shirt? No, we don’t know, Blaise. Our furs may be
gone for good, but we can’t be sure. Father may have put them in there
out of reach of the storm and later moved them to some other place, or
they may never have been in that hole at all. Some animal may have
carried that bit of rawhide there.”

Blaise shook his head. “What animal could go up there?”

“A squirrel perhaps, or a bird, a gull. Anyway we can’t give up the
search yet, just because we have found a bit of rawhide in a hole in the
rocks. That would be folly. Perhaps the arrow points up the rift to some
spot above. We can’t climb up here. We must go back.”

The two returned to the wreck and climbed up the way they had come down.
Hugh again in the lead, they followed along the top of the rift to its
head. There they sought earnestly for some sign that might lead them to
the cache, but found none. When at sunset they gave up the search for
that day, their fear that the furs had been stolen from the hole in the
rock had grown near to a certainty. Well-nigh discouraged, they went back
to the beach in the shallow cove where they had left their boat.

“Why is it, Blaise,” Hugh asked, as they sat by the fire waiting for the
kettle to boil, “that no Indians dwell on this big island? It is a
beautiful place and there must be game and furs for the hunting.”

Blaise gave his characteristic French shrug. “I know not if there is much
game, and Minong is far from the mainland. I have heard that there is
great store of copper in the rocks. The Ojibwas say that the island was
made by the giant Kepoochikan. Once upon a time the fish quarrelled with
Kepoochikan and tried to drown him by making a great flood. But he built
a big floating island and made it rich with copper and there he took his
family and all the kinds of birds and beasts there are. When the water,
which had spread over the whole earth, stopped rising, he told a gull to
dive down to the bottom and bring up some mud. The gull could not dive so
far, but drowned before he reached the bottom. Then Kepoochikan sent a
beaver. The beaver came up almost drowned, but with a ball of mud
clutched tight in his hands. Kepoochikan took the mud and made a new
earth, but he kept the island Minong for his home. After many years there
was another giant, the great Nanibozho, who was chief of all the Indians
on the new land Kepoochikan had made. Nanibozho is a good manito and
Kepoochikan a bad one. They went to war, and Nanibozho threw a great
boulder from the mainland across at Kepoochikan and conquered him. The
boulder is here on Minong yet they say. Since then Nanibozho has guarded
the copper of Minong, though some say his real dwelling place is on
Thunder Cape. Off the shore and in the channels of Minong he has set
sharp rocks to destroy the canoes that approach the island, and he has
many spirits to help him guard the treasure.”

“That is only a tale, of course,” said Hugh somewhat disdainfully. “We of
the ship _Otter_ camped here several days and we saw or heard no spirits.
We found nothing to fear.”

“You sought no copper,” was the retort. “It is said that sometimes
Kepoochikan and Nanibozho fight together on the rocks and hurl great
boulders about. Strange tales there are too of the thick forest, of the
little lakes and bays. There is one place called the Bay of Manitos,
where, so I have heard, dwell giant Windigos and great serpents and huge
birds and spirits that mock the lonely traveller with shouts and threats
and laughter.”

“Surely you do not believe such tales, Blaise,” Hugh protested, “or fear
such spirits.”

“I know that neither Kepoochikan nor Nanibozho made the world,” the
younger boy replied seriously. “My father and the priests taught me that
the good God made the world. But whether the tales of giants and spirits
are true, I know not. That I do not fear them I have proved by coming
here with you.”

To that remark Hugh had no answer. To believe or be inclined to believe
such tales and yet to come to the enchanted island, to come with only one
companion, surely proved his half-brother’s courage. Indeed the older boy
had no thought of questioning the younger’s bravery. He had come to know
Blaise too well.




                                  XVI
                               THE CACHE


The night being clear, the boys did not trouble to prepare a shelter.
They merely cut some balsam branches and spread them smoothly on the
beach. Strange to say, the more superstitious half-breed lad fell asleep
immediately, while the white boy, who had scorned the notion of giants
and manitos, found sleep long in coming. That night seemed to him the
loneliest he had ever spent. Camp, on the trip down and up the main
shore, had, to be sure, usually been made far from the camps of other
men. But there _were_ men, both red and white, on that shore. When the
lake was not too rough, there was always the chance that the sound of
human voices and the dip of paddles might be heard at any time during the
night, as a canoe passed in the starlight.

Here, however, the whole length and breadth of the great island,—which
the two lads believed even larger than it really is, some fifty miles in
length and twelve or fourteen broad at its widest part,—there lived, so
far as they knew, not one human being. Never before had Hugh felt so
utterly lonely, such a small, insignificant human creature in an unknown
and unfeeling wilderness of woods, waters and rocks. The island was far
more beautiful and hospitable now than it had appeared when he visited it
before, but then, almost uncannily lonely and remote though the place had
seemed, he had had the companionship of Baptiste and Captain Bennett and
the rest of the ship’s crew.

Yet what was there to fear? It was not likely that Isle Royale contained
any especially fierce beasts. There were wolves and lynxes, but they were
skulking, cowardly creatures, and, in the summer at least, must find
plentiful prey of rabbits and other small animals. Moose too there were
and perhaps bears, but both were harmless unless attacked and cornered.
It was not the thought of any animal enemy that caused Hugh’s uneasiness,
as he lay listening to the night sounds. His feeling was rather of
apprehension, of dread of some unknown evil that threatened his comrade
and himself. He tried to shake off the unreasonable dread, but everything
about him seemed to serve to intensify the feeling, the low, continuous
murmur of the waves on the rocks, the swishing rustle of the wind in the
trees, the long-drawn, eerie cries of two loons answering one another
somewhere up the bay, the lonely “hoot-ti-toot” of an owl. Once from the
wooded ridges above him, there came with startling clearness the shrill
screech of a lynx. But all these sounds were natural ones, heard many
times during his adventurous journey. Why, tonight, did they seem to hold
some new and fearful menace?

Disgusted with himself, he resolved to conquer the unreasonable dread.
Will power alone could not triumph over his unrest, but physical
weariness won at last and he fell asleep. A brief shower, from the edge
of a passing storm-cloud, aroused him once, but the rain did not last
long enough to wet his blanket, and he was off to sleep again in a few
minutes.

Hugh woke with a start. Dawn had come, but the little cove was shrouded
in white mist. Beside him on the balsam bed, Blaise was sitting upright,
his body rigid, his bronze face tense. He was listening intently. Hugh
freed his arms from his blanket and raised himself on his elbow. Blaise
turned his head.

“You heard it?” he whispered.

“Something waked me. What was it?”

“A gun shot.”

“Impossible!”

“I heard it clearly. I had just waked.”

“Near by?”

“Not very far away. Up there somewhere.”

Blaise pointed to the now invisible woods above the sheer cliff that
formed the central shore of the cove between the beaches. “It is hard to
be quite sure of the direction in this fog, and there was only one shot.”

For some minutes the two lads sat still, listening, but the sound was not
repeated. It seemed incredible that any human being should be so near on
the big island where neither white men nor Indians were ever known to
come intentionally. Hugh was inclined to think Blaise mistaken. The
younger boy had certainly heard some sharp sound, but Hugh could scarcely
believe it was the report of a gun.

However, the mere suspicion that any other man might be near by was
enough to make the boys proceed with the greatest caution. Veiled by the
fog,—which had been caused by the warm shower falling on the lake during
the night,—they could be seen only by someone very near at hand, but
there were other ways in which they might be betrayed. The sound of their
voices or movements, the smell of the smoke from their cooking fire might
reveal their presence. The secret nature of their quest made them anxious
that their visit to the island should not become known. So they lighted
no fire, breakfasting on the cold remains of last night’s corn porridge
sprinkled with maple sugar. They talked little and in whispers, and took
care to make the least possible noise.

Having decided to give at least one more day to the search for the furs,
the lads climbed the steep slope and made their way to the head of the
fissure. Up there the fog was much less thick than down in the cove. The
crack in the rock had narrowed to a mere slit almost choked with tree
roots upon which fallen leaves and litter had lodged. Near the edge, in a
depression where there was a little soil, stood a clump of birch sprouts
growing up about the stump of an old broken tree. In their search for
some blaze or mark that might guide them, the two thought they had
examined every tree in the vicinity.

That morning, as he was about to pass the clump of birches, Hugh happened
to notice what a rapid growth the sprouts had made that season. The sight
of the new growth suggested something to him. He began to pull apart and
bend back the little trees to get a better view of the old stump. There,
concealed by the young growth, was the mark he sought. A piece of the
ragged, gray, lichen-scarred bark had been sliced away, and on the bare,
crumbly wood had been cut a transverse groove with an arrow point.

Hugh promptly summoned Blaise. The cut in the old stump seemed to prove
that the furs might not, after all, have been stolen from the hole in the
rocks. The arrow pointed directly along the overgrown crack, which the
lads traced for fifty or sixty feet farther, when it came abruptly to an
end. They had come to a hollow or gully. The crack showed distinctly in
the steep rock wall, but the bottom of the hollow and the opposite
gradual slope were deep with soil and thick with growth. The rift, which
widened at the outer end into a cleft, ran, it was apparent, clear
through the rock ridge that formed the shore cliff. The searchers had now
reached the lower ground behind that ridge. Which way should they turn
next?

That question was answered promptly. The abrupt face of the rock wall was
well overgrown with green moss and green-gray lichens. In one place the
short, thick growth had been scratched away to expose a strip of the gray
stone about an inch wide and six or seven inches long. The clean-cut
appearance of the scratch seemed to prove that it had been made with a
knife or some other sharp instrument. So slowly do moss and lichens
spread on a rock surface that such a mark would remain clear and distinct
for one season at least, probably for several years. There was no arrow
point here, but the scratch was to the left of the crack. The boys turned
unhesitatingly in that direction.

The growth in this low place was dense. They had to push their way among
old, ragged birches and close standing balsams draped with gray beards of
lichen which were sapping the trees’ life-blood. Everywhere, on the steep
rock wall, on each tree trunk, they sought for another sign. For several
hundred yards they found nothing, until they came to a cross gully
running back towards the lake. In the very entrance stood a small, broken
birch. The slender stem was not completely severed, the top of the tree
resting on the ground.

“There is our sign,” said Blaise as soon as he caught sight of the birch.

“It is only a broken tree,” Hugh protested. “I see nothing to show that
it is a sign.”

“But I see something,” Blaise answered promptly. “First, there is the
position, right here where we need guidance. The tree has been broken so
that it points down that ravine. The break is not old, not weathered
enough to have happened before last winter. Yet it happened before the
leaves came out. They were still in the bud. It was in late winter or
early spring that tree was broken.”

“Just about the time father must have been on the island,” Hugh
commented.

Blaise went on with his explanation. “What broke the tree? The wind?
Sound birches are not easily broken by wind. They sway, they bend,
sometimes they are tipped over at the roots. But the stem itself is not
broken unless it is rotten or the storm violent. Here are no signs of
strong wind. There are no other broken trees near this one.”

“That is true,” murmured Hugh looking about him.

“Now we will look at the break,” Blaise continued confidently. “See, the
trunk is sound, but it has been cut with an axe, cut deep and bent down.
And here, look here!” His usually calm voice was thrilling with
excitement. He was pointing to some small cuts in the white bark just
below the break.

“J. B., father’s initials!” cried Hugh.

Blaise laid his finger on his lips to remind his companion that caution
must still be observed. They had heard no further sound and had seen no
sign of a human being, but the half-breed lad had not forgotten the sharp
report that had so startled him in the dawn. It was best to move silently
and speak with lowered voice.

Blaise led the way down the narrow cross gully, so narrow that where a
tree grew,—and trees seemed to grow everywhere on this wild island where
they could push down a root,—there was scarcely room to get by. After a
few hundred yards of such going, the ravine began to widen. The walls
became higher and so sheer that nothing could cling to them but moss,
lichens and sturdy crevice plants. Under foot there was no longer any
soil, only pebbles and broken rock fragments. Ahead, beyond the deep
shadow of the cleft, lay sunlit water. This was evidently another of the
fissures that ran down through the outer rock ridge to the water,
fissures that were characteristic of that stretch of shore.

“We are coming back to the lake through another crack much like the one
where the old boat lies,” said Hugh. “We must be off the trail somewhere.
There is no place here to hide furs.”

Blaise, who was still ahead, did not answer. He was closely scanning the
rock wall on either side. A moment later, he paused and gave a little
grunt of interest or satisfaction.

“What is it?” Hugh asked.

Blaise took another step forward, and pointed to the right hand wall. A
narrow fissure extended from top to bottom. So narrow was the crack that
Hugh rather doubted whether he could squeeze into it.

“I will go first, I am smaller,” Blaise suggested. “If I cannot go
through, we shall know that no man has been in there.”

Slender and lithe, Blaise found that he could wriggle his way through
without much difficulty. The heavier, broader-shouldered Hugh found the
task less easy. He had to go sidewise and for a moment he thought he
should stick fast, but he managed to squeeze past the narrowest spot, to
find himself in an almost round hollow. This hole or pit in the outer
ridge was perhaps twenty feet in diameter with abrupt rock walls and a
floor of boulders and pebbles, among which grew a few hardy shrubs. It
was open to the sky and ringed at the top with shrubby growth. Hugh
glanced about him with a keen sense of disappointment. Surely the furs
were not in this place.

Blaise, on the other side of a scraggly ninebark bush, seemed to be
examining a pile of boulders and rock fragments. The older boy rounded
the bush, and disappointment gave way to excitement. By what agency had
those stones been heaped in that particular spot? They had not fallen
from the wall beyond. The pit had no opening through which waves could
wash. Had that heap been put together by the hand of man? Was it indeed a
cache?

Without a word spoken, the two lads set about demolishing the stone pile.
One after another they lifted each stone and threw it aside. As he rolled
away one of the larger boulders, Hugh could not restrain a little cry. A
bit of withered cedar had come to light. With eager energy he flung away
the remaining stones. There lay revealed a heap of something covered with
cedar branches, the flat sprays, withered but still aromatic, woven
together closely to form a tight and waterproof covering. Over and around
them, the stones had been heaped to conceal every sprig.

With flying fingers, the boys pulled the sprays apart. There were the
bales of furs each in a skin wrapper. The brothers had found the hidden
cache and their inheritance. Both lads were surprised at the number of
the bales. If the pelts were of good quality, no mean sum would be
realized by their sale. They would well repay in gold for all the long
search. Yet, to do the boys justice, neither was thinking just then of
the worth of the pelts. Their feeling was rather of satisfaction that
they were really carrying out their father’s last command. The long and
difficult search was over, and they had not failed in it.

They lifted the packages from a platform of poles resting on stones. The
whole cache had been cleverly constructed. No animal could tear apart the
bales, and, even in the severest storm, no water could reach them. Over
them the branches had formed a roof strong enough to keep the top stones
from pressing too heavily upon the furs.

“But where is the packet?” cried Hugh. “It must be inside one of the
bales, but which one I wonder.”

“I think it is this one,” Blaise replied.

The package he was examining seemed to be just like the others, except
that into the rawhide thong that bound it had been twisted a bit of
scarlet wool ravelled from a cap or sash. Blaise would have untied the
thong, but the impatient Hugh cut it, and stripped off the wrapping. The
bale contained otter skins of fine quality. Between two of the pelts was
a small, flat packet. It was tied with a bit of cedar cord and sealed
with a blotch of pitch into which had been pressed the seal of the ring
Hugh now wore.

“Shall we open this here and now, Blaise?” Hugh asked.

“That is for you to say, my brother. You are the elder.”

“Then I think we had best open it at once.”

Hugh broke the seal and was about to untie the cord, when from somewhere
above the rim of the pit, there rang out a loud, long-drawn call,
“Oh-eye-ee, oh-eye-ee-e.” It was not the cry of an animal. It was a human
voice.




                                  XVII
                           THE SEALED PACKET


Hastily Hugh thrust the unopened packet into the breast of his deerskin
tunic, and looked up apprehensively at the border of green about the rim
of the pit. The man who had shouted could not be far away. There might be
others even nearer. If anyone should push through that protecting fringe
of growth, he would be looking directly down on the two lads. The bales
would be in plain view.

Hugh thought quickly. “We must conceal the furs again, Blaise,” he
whispered, “until we can find some way to get them to the boat.”

Blaise nodded. “We will take them away at night.”

Rapidly and with many an apprehensive glance upward, the two replaced the
bales on the platform of poles, covered the heap with the cedar boughs
and built up the stones around and over the whole. They were in too great
haste to do as careful a piece of work as Jean Beaupré had done. Their
rock pile would scarcely have stood close scrutiny without betraying
something suspicious. From above, however, its appearance was innocent
enough, and no chance comer would be likely to descend into the hole.

Squeezing through the narrow slit, the brothers examined the cleft that
ran down in a steep incline of rock fragments to the water. The simplest
plan would be to bring the boat in there. With strangers likely to appear
at any moment, it would be best to wait until nightfall. The two decided
to return to the cove where they had camped, and wait for darkness.

Back through the fissure and over the low ground behind the shore ridge,
they made their way cautiously, silently. They went slowly, taking pains
to efface any noticeable tracks or signs of their passage, and watching
and listening alertly for any sight or sound of human beings. A rustling
in the bushes caused both to stand motionless until they caught sight of
the cause, a little, bright-eyed squirrel or a gray-brown snowshoe rabbit
with long ears and big hind feet. Both boys would have liked that fresh
meat for the dinner pot, but they had no wish to attract attention by a
shot.

When they reached the top of the cliff, they found that the fog had
entirely disappeared, driven away by a light breeze. As they went down
the steep, open slope to the little beach, they knew themselves to be
exposed to the view of anyone who might happen to be looking out from the
woods bordering the cove. Anxiously they scanned woods, rocks and lake,
but saw no sign of any human being. Not a living creature but a fish duck
peacefully riding the water was to be seen. The boat and supplies were
undisturbed.

The boys stayed quietly in the cove during the remaining hours of
daylight. The beach was partially hidden from the water by the end of the
shore ridge, and screened on the land side by the dense growth of trees
and bushes bordering the pebbles. Beyond the beach was a vertical rock
cliff sheer to the water from its forested summit. Then came another
short stretch of pebbles bounded by a low rock wall and protected by the
jutting mass of rock, only scantily wooded, that formed the dividing line
between the twin coves. To anyone standing over there or among the trees
at the edge of the high central cliff, the boys and their boat would have
been in plain sight. The shot Blaise had heard in the early dawn had come
from somewhere above that cliff, but it was not likely that the man who
had fired that shot was still there. Doubtless he had been hunting. At
any rate the lads had no better place to wait for darkness to come. They
were at least far enough from the pit so their discovery by wandering
Indians or white hunters need not lead to the finding of the furs. As the
day wore on, the brothers cast many an anxious glance around the shores
of the cove. They were startled whenever a squirrel chattered, a
woodpecker tapped loudly on a branch, or two tree trunks rubbed against
one another, swayed by a stronger gust of wind.

As their food was ill adapted to being eaten raw, they permitted
themselves a small cooking fire, taking care to use only thoroughly dry
wood and to keep a clear flame with as little smoke as possible. After
the kettle had been swung over the fire, Hugh drew from his breast the
packet and examined the outside carefully. The wrapping was of oiled
fish-skin tied securely.

“Shall we open it, Blaise?” he asked again.

The younger boy cast a quick glance about him, at the rock slope they had
descended, the dense bushes beyond the pebbles, the forest rim along the
summit of the high central cliff, the rough, wave-eaten rock mass across
the cove. Then his eyes returned to his companion’s face and he nodded
silently.

Curious though he was, Hugh was deliberate in opening the mysterious
packet. He untied the cord and removed the outer cover carefully not to
tear it. Within the oiled skin wrapper was still another of the finest,
whitest, softest doeskin, tied with the same sort of bark cord. The cord
had been passed through holes in a square of paper-thin birch bark. On
the bark label was written in the same faint, muddy brown ink Blaise had
used:

  “To be delivered to M. René Dubois,
                               At Montreal.
  Of great importance.”


Hugh turned over the packet. It was sealed, like the outer wrapper, with
drops of pitch upon which Jean Beaupré’s seal had been pressed. For
several minutes the boy sat considering what he ought to do. Then he
looked up at his half-brother’s equally grave face.

“I don’t like to open this,” Hugh said. “It is addressed to M. René
Dubois of Montreal and it is sealed. I think father intended me to take
it to Monsieur Dubois with the seals unbroken. Doubtless he will open it
in my presence and tell me what it contains.”

Blaise nodded understandingly. He had lived long enough in civilization
to realize the seriousness of breaking the seals of a packet addressed to
someone else. “That Monsieur Dubois, do you know him?” he inquired.

“No, I didn’t know my father had any friends in Montreal. He never lived
there, you know. His old home was in Quebec, where I was born. I don’t
remember that I ever heard of Monsieur René Dubois, but my relatives in
Montreal may know him. Probably I can find him. If I can’t, then I think
it would be right to open this packet, but not until I have tried. Shall
I take charge of this, Blaise?”

“You are the elder and our father said you must take the packet to
Montreal.”

To the impatient Hugh the wait until the sun descended beyond the woods
of the low point across the water seemed long indeed. He found it hard to
realize that only two nights before he and Blaise had reached the point
and had tied up there. They had surely been lucky to find the cache of
furs so soon.

Not until the shadows of the shore lay deep upon the water did the lads
push off the bateau. They paddled silently out of the little cove and
close under the abrupt, riven rocks, taking care not to let a blade
splash as it dipped and was withdrawn. The water was rippled by the
lightest of breezes, and the moon was bright. The deep cleft where Jean
Beaupré’s wrecked boat lay was in black darkness, though. Hugh could not
even make out the stern. His mind was busy with thoughts of the father he
had known so slightly, with speculations about his coming to the island,
about the way he had left it. Through what treachery had he received his
death blow?

Another rift in the rock was passed before the boys reached a wider,
shallower cleft they felt sure was the one leading to the cache.
Cautiously they turned into the dark mouth of the fissure and grounded
the boat on the pebbles, water-worn and rounded here where the waves
reached them. Overhead the moonlight filtered down among the thick sprays
of the stunted cedars that grew along the rim and even down into the
crack. But the darkness at the bottom was so deep the brothers could
proceed only by feeling their way with both hands and feet. In this
manner they went up over pebbles and angular rock fragments to the narrow
slit in the wall, and squeezed through in pitch blackness to the circular
hollow.

There was moonlight in the pit, but the cache, close under the rock wall,
was in the shadow. So difficult did the boys find it to remove the stones
in the darkness, that they decided to risk lighting a torch. During the
afternoon Blaise had made a couple of torches of spruce and balsam. He
lighted one now and stuck it in a cranny of the rock just above the heap
of stones. By the feeble, flickering and smoky light, the cache was
uncovered. Pushing and hauling the bales through the narrow crack was
difficult and troublesome. The larger ones would not go through, and had
to be unwrapped and reduced to smaller parcels. Even by the dim light of
the torch, the boys could see that the furs were of excellent quality.
Before loading, the bateau had to be pushed out a little way, Blaise
standing in the water to hold it while Hugh piled in the bales. Then both
climbed in and paddled quietly out of the crack.

There was not breeze enough for sailing. Hugh and Blaise were anxious to
get away from the spot where they had found the furs and had heard the
shout, but paddling the heavily laden bateau was slow work. Without a
breeze to fill the sail, they were loth to start across the open lake, so
they kept on along shore to the northeast. When they had put a mile or
more between themselves and the place where they had found the furs, they
would camp and wait for sunrise and a breeze.

Slowly and laboriously they paddled on, close to the high shore. The
calm, moonlit water stretched away on their left. The dark,
forest-crowned rocks, huge, worn and seamed pillars, towered forbiddingly
on the other side. At last the wider view of the water ahead and the
barrenness of the tumbled rocks to the right indicated that they were
reaching the end of the shore along which they had been travelling.

“We’ll land now,” said Hugh, “as soon as we can find a place.”

The abrupt, truncated pillars of rock were not so high here, but were
bordered at the water’s edge with broken blocks and great boulders,
affording little chance of a landing place. By paddling close in,
however, slowly and cautiously to avoid disaster, the boys discovered a
niche between two blocks of rock, with water deep enough to permit
running the boat in. There they climbed out on the rock and secured the
bateau by a couple of turns of the rope around a smaller block. In rough
weather such a landing would have been impossible, but on this still
night there was no danger of the bateau bumping upon the rocks. Farther
along Blaise found a spot where the solid rock shelved down gradually.
Rolling themselves in their blankets, the brothers stretched out on the
hard bed.

The plaintive crying of gulls waked Hugh just as the sun was coming up
from the water, a great red ball in the morning mist. “I don’t like this
place,” he said as he sat up. “We can be seen plainly from the lake.”

“Yes,” Blaise agreed, “but we can see far across the lake. If a boat
comes, we shall see it while it is yet a long way off. I think we need
not fear anything from that direction. No, the only way an enemy can draw
near unseen is from the land, from the woods farther back there.”

“The water is absolutely still,” Hugh went on. “There isn’t a capful of
wind to fill our sail, and we can’t paddle this loaded boat clear across
to the mainland. We must find a better place than this, though, to wait
for a breeze. I am going to look around a bit.”

The lads soon found that they were near the end of a point, a worn,
wave-eaten, rock point, bare except for a few scraggly bushes, clumps of
dwarfed white cedar and such mosses and lichens as could cling to the
surface. Farther back were woods, mostly evergreen. The two felt that
they must find a spot where they could wait for a wind without being
visible from the woods. Yet they wanted to remain where they could watch
the weather and get away at the first opportunity. At the very tip of the
point, the slate-gray rocks were abrupt, slightly overhanging indeed, but
in one spot there lay exposed at the base a few feet of low, shelving,
wave-smoothed shore, which must be under water in rough weather. On this
calm day the lower rock shore was dry. There, in the shelter of the
overhanging masses, the boys would be entirely concealed from the land
side. A little farther along on the end of the point, rose an abrupt,
rounded tower of rock. Between the rock tower and the place they had
selected for themselves was a narrow inlet where the bateau would be
fairly well hidden. They shoved the boat out from between the boulders,
where it had lain safe while they slept, and paddled around to the little
inlet. On the wave-smoothed, low rock shore, they kindled a tiny fire of
dry sticks gathered at the edge of the woods, and hung the kettle from a
pole slanted over the flames from a cranny in the steep rock at the rear.

The wind did not come up as the sun rose higher, as the lads had hoped it
would. The delay was trying, especially to the impetuous Hugh. They had
found the cache, secured the furs and the packet, and had got safely away
with them, only to be stuck here on the end of this point for hours of
idle waiting. Yet even Hugh did not want to start across the lake under
the present conditions. Paddling the bateau had been laborious enough
when it was empty, but now, laden almost to the water-line, the boat was
far worse to handle. Propelling it was not merely hard work, but progress
would be so slow that the journey across to the mainland would be a long
one, with always the chance that the wind, when it did come, might blow
from the wrong quarter. The bateau would not sail against the wind. To
attempt to paddle it against wind and waves would invite disaster.
Sailing the clumsy craft, heavy laden as it was, across the open water
with a fair wind would be quite perilous enough. There was nothing to do
but wait, and this seemed as good a place in which to wait as any they
were likely to find.




                                 XVIII
                           THE FLEEING CANOE


As the morning advanced, the sun grew hot, beating down on the water and
radiating heat from the rocks. Scarcely a ripple wrinkled the blue
surface of the lake, and the distance was hazy and shimmering. An island
with steep, straight sides, four or five miles northeast of the point,
was plainly visible, but Thunder Cape to the west was so dim it could
barely be discerned. The day was much like the one on which the lads had
come across from the mainland.

Hugh grew more and more restless. Several times he climbed the only
climbable place on the overhanging rock and peeped between the branches
of a dwarfed cedar bush. He could see across to the edge of the woods,
but he discovered nothing to either interest or alarm him. By the time
the sun had passed the zenith, he could stand inaction no longer. He was
not merely restless. He had become vaguely uneasy. The boat was hidden
from his view by the rocks between. In such a lonely place he would have
had no fear for the furs, had it not been for the shot and the call he
and Blaise had heard.

“Someone might slip out of the woods and down to the boat without our
catching a glimpse of him,” Hugh remarked at last. “I’m going over there
to see if everything is all right.”

To reach the boat, he was obliged to climb to his peeping place and pull
himself up the rest of the way, or else go around and across the top of
the steep rocks. He chose the latter route. The boat and furs he found
unharmed. The only trespasser was a gull that had alighted on one of the
bales and was trying with its strong, sharp beak to pick a hole in the
wrapping. He frightened the bird away, then stopped to drink from his
cupped palm.

A low cry from Blaise startled him. He glanced up just in time to see his
brother, who had followed him to the top of the rocks, drop flat.
Curiosity getting the better of caution, Hugh sprang up the slope. One
glance towards the west, and he followed the younger lad’s example and
dropped on his face.

“A canoe! They must have seen us.”

Cautiously Hugh raised his head for another look. The canoe was some
distance away. When he had first glimpsed it, it had been headed towards
the point. Now, to his surprise, it was going in the opposite direction,
going swiftly, paddles flashing in the sun.

“They have turned about, Blaise. Is it possible they didn’t see us?”

“Truly they saw us. My back was that way. I turned my head and there they
were. My whole body was in clear view. Then you came, and they must have
seen you also. They are running away from us.”

“It would seem so indeed, but what do they fear? There are four men in
that canoe, and we are but two.”

“They know not how many we are. They may have enemies on Minong, though I
never heard that any man lived here.”

“Something has certainly frightened them away. They are making good speed
to the west, towards the mainland.”

The boys remained stretched out upon the rock, only their heads raised as
they watched the departing canoe.

“They turn to the southwest now,” Blaise commented after a time. “They go
not to the mainland, but are bound for some other part of Minong.”

“They were bound for this point when we first saw them,” was Hugh’s
reply. “We don’t know what made them change their minds, but we have
cause to be grateful to it whatever——What was that?”

He sprang to his feet and turned quickly.

“Lie down,” commanded Blaise. “They will see you.”

Hugh, unheeding, plunged down to the bateau. It was undisturbed. Not a
living creature was in sight. Yet something rattling down and falling
with a splash into the water had startled him. He looked about for an
explanation. A fresh scar at the top of the slope showed where a piece of
rock had chipped off. Undoubtedly that was what he had heard. His own
foot, as he lay outstretched, had dislodged the loose, crumbling flake.

Reminded of caution, Hugh crawled back up the slope instead of going
upright. The canoe was still in sight going southwest. Both boys remained
lying flat until it had disappeared beyond the low point. Then they
returned to the low shore beneath the overhanging rock. For the present
at least there seemed to be nothing to be feared from that canoe, but
would it return, and where was the man who had fired the shot and later
sent that call ringing through the woods? Did he belong with the canoe
party? Had he gone away with them, or was he, with companions perhaps,
somewhere on the wooded ridges? The boys did not know whether to remain
where they were or go somewhere else.

The weather finally brought them to a decision. All day they had hoped
for a breeze, but when it came it brought with it threatening gray and
white clouds. Rough, dark green patches on the water, that had been so
calm all day, denoted the passing of squalls. Thunder began to rumble
threateningly, and the gray, streaked sky to the north and west indicated
that rain was falling there. The island to the northeast shrank to about
half its former height and changed its shape. It grew dimmer and grayer,
as the horizon line crept gradually nearer.

“Fog,” remarked Blaise briefly.

“It is coming in,” Hugh agreed, “and this is not a good place to be
caught in a thick fog. Shall we go back into the woods?”

“I think we had best take the bateau and go along the other side of this
point. We cannot start for the mainland to-night, and we shall need a
sheltered place for our camp.”

The fog did not seem to be coming in very rapidly, but by the time the
bateau had been shoved off, the island across the water had disappeared.
The breeze came in gusts only and was not available for sailing. So the
lads were obliged to take up their paddles again.

Beyond the tower-like rock there was a short stretch of shelving shore,
followed by abrupt, dark rocks of roughly pillared formation. Then came a
gradual slope, rough, seamed and uneven of surface. It looked indeed as
if composed of pillars, the tops of which had been sliced off with a
downward sweep of the giant Kepoochikan’s knife. The shore ahead was of a
yellowish gray color, as if bleached by the sun, slanting to the water,
with trees growing as far down as they could find anchorage and
sustenance. These sloping rocks were in marked contrast to those of the
opposite side of the point, along which the boys had come the night
before, where the cliffs and ridges rose so abruptly from the lake.

After a few minutes of paddling, the brothers found themselves passing
along a channel thickly wooded to the water-line. The land on the right
was a part of the same long point, but on the left were islands with
short stretches of water between, across which still other islands beyond
could be seen. The fog, though not so dense in this protected channel as
on the open lake, was thickening, and the boys kept a lookout for a
camping place.

When an opening on the left revealed what appeared to be a sheltered bay,
they turned in. Between two points lay two tiny islets, one so small it
could hold but five or six little trees. Paddling between the nearer
point and islet, the boys found themselves in another much narrower
channel, open to the northeast, but apparently closed in the other
direction. Going on between the thickly forested shores,—a dense mass of
spruce, balsam, white cedar, birch and mountain ash,—they saw that what
they had taken for the end of the bay was in reality an almost round
islet so thickly wooded that the shaggy-barked trunks of its big white
cedars leaned far out over the water. The explorers rounded the islet to
find that the shores beyond did not quite come together, leaving a very
narrow opening. Paddling slowly and taking care to avoid the rocks that
rose nearly to the surface and left a channel barely wide enough for the
bateau to pass through, they entered a little landlocked bay, as secluded
and peaceful as an inland pond.

“We couldn’t find a better place,” said Hugh, looking around the wooded
shores with satisfaction, “to wait for the weather to clear. We are well
hidden from any canoe that might chance to come along that outer
channel.”

The little pond was shallow. The boat had to be paddled cautiously to
avoid grounding. Below the thick fringe of trees and alders, the prow was
run up on the pebbles.

“We might as well leave the furs in the boat,” Hugh remarked.

“No.” Blaise shook his head emphatically. “We cannot be sure no one will
come in here. The furs we can hide. We ourselves can take to the woods,
but this heavy bateau we cannot hide.”

“I’m not afraid anyone will find us here.”

“We thought there was no one on Minong at all. Yet we have heard a shot
and a call and have seen a canoe.”

“You’re right. We can’t be too cautious.”

While Hugh unloaded the bales, Blaise went in search of a hiding place.
Returning in a few minutes, he was surprised to find the boat, the prow
of which had just touched the beach, now high and dry on the pebbles for
half its length. Hugh had not pulled the boat up. The water had receded.

“There is a big old birch tree there in the woods and it is hollow,”
Blaise reported. “It has been struck by lightning and is broken. We can
hide the furs there.”

“Won’t squirrels or wood-mice get at them?”

“We will put bark beneath and over them, and we shall not leave them
there long.”

“I hope not surely.”

Blaise lifted a bale and started into the woods. Hugh, with another bale,
was about to follow, when Blaise halted him.

“Walk not too close to me. Go farther over there. If we go the same way,
we shall make a beaten trail that no one could overlook. We must keep
apart and go and come different ways.”

Hugh grasped the wisdom of this plan at once. He kept considerably to the
left of Blaise until he neared the old birch, and on his return followed
still another route. He was surprised to find that the water had come up
again. The pebbles that had been exposed so short a time before were now
under water once more. The bow of the bateau was afloat and he had to
pull it farther up.

“There is a sort of tide in here,” he remarked as Blaise came out of the
woods. “It isn’t a real tide, for it comes and goes too frequently. Do
you know what causes it?”

“No, though I have seen the water come and go that way in some of the
bays of the mainland.”

“It isn’t a true tide, of course,” Hugh repeated, “but a sort of
current.”

Going lightly in their soft moccasins, the two made the trips necessary
to transport the furs. They left scarcely any traces of their passage
that might not have been made by some wild animal. Hugh climbed the big,
hollow tree which still stood firm enough to bear his weight. Down into
the great hole in the trunk he lowered a sheet of birch bark that Blaise
had stripped from a fallen tree some distance away. Then Hugh dropped
down the bales, and put another piece of bark on top. The furs were well
hidden. From the ground no one could see anything unusual about the old
tree.

Returning to the shore, the two pushed off the boat and paddled to
another spot several hundred yards away. There Hugh felled a small poplar
and cut the slender trunk into rollers which he used to pull the heavy
bateau well up on shore where it would be almost hidden by the alders.

Night was approaching and the wooded shores of the little lake were still
veiled in fog. The water was calm and the damp air spicy with the scent
of balsam and sweet with the odor of the dainty pink twin-flowers. On the
whole of the big island the boys could scarcely have found a more
peaceful spot. The woods were so thick there seemed to be no open spaces
convenient for camping, so the brothers kindled their supper fire on the
pebbles above the water-line, and lay down to sleep in the boat.




                                  XIX
                           THE BAY OF MANITOS


The night passed quietly, unbroken by any sound of beast, bird or man,
until the crying of the gulls woke the sleepers in the fog-gray dawn.
Chilled and stiff, they threw off their damp blankets and climbed out of
the bateau. By dint of much patience and a quantity of finely shredded
birch bark, a slow fire of damp wood was kindled, the flame growing
brighter as the wood dried out.

After he had swallowed his last spoonful of corn, Hugh remarked, “If we
are held here to-day, we must try for food of some kind. We haven’t
hunted or fished since we left the mainland, and our supplies are going
fast.”

Blaise nodded. “We need fire no shots to fish.”

Fishing in the little pond did not appear promising. When the boys
attempted to paddle through the passageway, they ran aground, and were
forced to wait for the water to rise and float the boat. The same
fluctuation they had noticed the day before was still going on. Luck did
not prove good in the narrow channel, and they went on into the wider one
between the long point and the row of islands. The fog was almost gone,
though the sky was still gray. Would the weather permit a start for the
mainland?

Turning to the northeast, they went the way they had come the preceding
afternoon. As they approached the end of the last island, they realized
that this was no time to attempt a crossing. Wind there was now, too much
wind. It came from the northwest, and the lake, a deep green under the
gray sky, was heaving with big waves, their tips touched with foam. The
bateau would not sail against that wind. To try to paddle the
heavily-laden boat across those waves would be the worst sort of folly.

Turning again, they went slowly back through the protected channel, Hugh
wielding the blade while Blaise fished. Luck was still against them.
Either there were no fish in the channel or they were not hungry. On
beyond the entrance to the hiding place, the two paddled. Passing the
abrupt end of an island, they came to a wider expanse of water. They were
still sheltered by the high, wooded ridges to their right, where dark
evergreens and bright-leaved birches rose in tiers. In the other
direction, they could see, between scattered islands, the open lake to
the horizon line. Misty blue hills in the distance ahead, beyond islands
and forested shores, indicated another bay, longer and wider than the one
the _Otter_ had entered.

Blaise, who was paddling now, raised his blade and looked questioningly
at Hugh. The latter answered the unspoken query. “I am for going on. We
have seen no signs of human beings since that canoe, and we need fish.”

Blaise nodded and dipped his paddle again. As they drew near a reef
running out from the end of a small island, Hugh felt his line tighten.
Fishing from the bateau was much less precarious than from a canoe.
Without endangering the balance of the boat, Hugh hauled in his line
quickly, swung in his fish, a lake trout of eight or ten pounds, and
rapped it smartly on the head with his paddle handle. He then gave the
line to Blaise and took another turn at the paddle. In less than ten
minutes, Blaise had a pink-fleshed trout somewhat smaller than Hugh’s.

Then luck deserted them again. Not another fish responded to the lure of
the hook, though they paddled back and forth beside the reef several
times. They went on along the little island and up the bay for another
mile or more without a nibble. It was a wonderful place, that lonely bay,
fascinating in its wild beauty. Down steep, densely wooded ridges, the
deep green spires of the spruces and balsams, interspersed with paler,
round-topped birches, descended in close ranks. Between the ridges, the
clear, transparent water was edged with gray-green cedars, white-flowered
mountain ashes, alders and other bushes, and dotted with wooded islands.
Far beyond the head of the bay blue hills rose against the sky. The
fishing, however, was disappointing, and paddling the bateau was tiresome
work, so the lads turned back.

As they passed close to an island, the younger boy’s quick eye caught a
movement in a dogwood near the water. A long-legged hare went leaping
across an opening.

“If we cannot get fish enough, we will eat rabbit,” said the boy, turning
the boat into a shallow curve in the shore of the little island. “I will
set some snares. If we are delayed another day, we will come in the
morning to take our catch.”

Tying the boat to an overhanging cedar tree, the brothers went ashore. On
the summit of the island, in the narrowest places along a sort of runway
evidently frequented by hares, Blaise set several snares of cedar bark
cord. While the younger brother was placing his last snare, Hugh returned
to the boat. He startled a gull perched upon the prow, and the bird rose
with a harsh cry of protest at being disturbed. Immediately the cry was
repeated twice, a little more faintly each time. Hugh looked about for
the birds that had answered. No other gulls were in sight. Then he
realized that what he had heard was a double echo, unusually loud and
clear. Forgetting caution he let out a loud, “Oh—O.” It came back
promptly, “Oh—o, o—o.”

“Be quiet!” The words were hissed in a low voice, as Blaise leaped out
from among the trees. “Canoes are coming. We must hide.”

He darted back into the woods, Hugh following. Swiftly they made their
way to the summit of the island. The growth was thin along the irregular
rock lane. Blaise dropped down and crawled, Hugh after him. Lying flat in
a patch of creeping bearberry, the younger lad raised his head a little.
Hugh wriggled to his side, and, peeping through a serviceberry bush,
looked out across the water.

The warning had been justified. Two canoes, several men in each, were
coming up the bay. The nearest canoe was not too far away for Hugh to
make out in the center a man who towered, tall and broad, above the
others. The boy remembered the gigantic Indian outlined against the sky,
as his canoe passed in the early dawn. He saw him again, standing
motionless, with folded arms, in the red light of the fire.

Blaise, close beside him, whispered in his ear, “Ohrante himself. What
shall we do?”

If the canoes came down the side of the island where the bateau was,
discovery was inevitable. For a moment, Hugh’s mind refused to work. A
gull circled out over the water, screaming shrilly. Like a ray of light a
plan flashed into the boy’s head.

“Stay here,” he whispered. “Keep still. Remember the ‘Bay of Spirits.’”

Swiftly Hugh wriggled back and darted down through the woods to the spot
where the bateau lay. He crouched behind an alder bush, drew a long
breath, and sent a loud, shrill cry across the water. Immediately it was
repeated once, twice, ringing back across the channel from the islands
and steep shore beyond. Before the final echo had died away, he sent his
voice forth again, this time in a hoarse bellow. Then, in rapid
succession, he hooted like an owl, barked like a dog, howled like a wolf,
whistled piercingly with two fingers in his mouth, imitated the mocking
laughter of the loon, growled and roared and hissed and screamed in every
manner he could devise and with all the power of his strong young lungs.
The roughened and cracked tones of his voice, not yet through turning
from boy’s to man’s, made his yells and howls and groans the more weird
and demoniac. And each sound was repeated once and again, producing a
veritable pandemonium of unearthly noises which seemed to come from every
side.

Pausing to take breath, Hugh was himself startled by another voice, not
an echo of his own, which rang out from somewhere above him, loud and
shrill. It spoke words he did not understand, and no echo came back. A
second time the voice cried out, still in the same strange language, but
now Hugh recognized the names Ohrante and Minong and then, to his
amazement, that of his own father Jean Beaupré. For an instant the lad
almost believed that this was indeed a “Bay of Spirits.” Who but a spirit
could be calling the name of Jean Beaupré in this remote place? Who but
Blaise, Beaupré’s other son? It was Blaise of course, crying out in
Ojibwa from up there at the top of the island. He had uttered some threat
against Ohrante.

Suddenly recalling his own part in the game, Hugh sent out another
hollow, threatening owl call, “Hoot-ti-toot, toot, hoot-toot!” The
ghostly voices repeated it, once, twice. Then he wailed and roared and
tried to scream like a lynx. He was in the midst of the maniacal loon
laugh, when Blaise slipped through the trees to his side.

“They run away, my brother.” The quick, flashing smile that marked him as
Jean Beaupré’s son crossed the boy’s face. “They have turned their canoes
and paddle full speed. The manitos you called up have frightened them
away. For a moment, before I understood what you were about, those spirit
cries frightened me also.”

“And you frightened me,” Hugh confessed frankly, “when you shouted from
up there.”

A grim expression replaced the lad’s smile. “The farther canoe had
turned, but the first still came on, with Ohrante urging his braves. Then
I too played spirit! But let us go back and see if they still run away.”

Hugh sent out another hoarse-voiced roar or two and Blaise added a war
whoop and a very good imitation of the angry cat scream of a lynx. Then
both slipped hurriedly through the trees to the top of the island and
sought the spot where they had first watched the approaching canoes. The
canoes were still visible, but farther away and moving rapidly down the
bay.

“They think this a bay of demons,” Hugh chuckled. “The echoes served us
well. But what was it you said to them, Blaise?”

“I said, ‘Beware! Come no farther or you die, every man!’ They heard and
held their paddles motionless. Then I said, ‘Beware of the manitos of
Minong, O Ohrante, murderer of our white son, Jean Beaupré.’”

“Blaise, I believe it _was_ Ohrante who killed father.”

“I know not. The thought came into my head that if he was the man he
might be frightened if he heard that the manitos knew of the deed. And he
was frightened.”

“Did he order the canoe turned?”

“I heard no order. He sat quite still. He made no move to stay his men
when they turned the canoe about. Ohrante is a bold man, yet he was
frightened. That I know.”

“Was it one of those canoes we saw yesterday, do you think?”

“It may be, but Ohrante was not in it. He is so big, far away though they
were, we should have seen him.”

“We couldn’t have helped seeing him. I wonder if they came around the end
of the long point. How could they in such a sea?”

“It may be that the waves have gone down out there. See how still the
water is in here now.”

“Then we can start for the mainland. We must go back. The canoes are out
of sight.”

“No, no, that would be folly. If they go straight out of this bay all
will be well, but we know not where they go or how far or where they may
lie in wait. No, no, Hugh, we have frightened them away from this spot,
but we dare not leave it ourselves until darkness comes.”




                                   XX
                         HUGH CLIMBS THE RIDGE


The small island was scarcely a half mile in circumference, and it did
not take Hugh and Blaise long to explore it. Its only inhabitants
appeared to be squirrels, hares and a few birds. Breakfast had been
light, and by mid-afternoon the boys were very hungry. The lighting of a
fire involved some risk, but they could not eat raw fish. On a bit of
open rock at the extreme upper or southwest end of the island, they made
a tiny blaze, taking care to keep the flame clear and almost smokeless,
and broiled the fish over the coals. The meal put both in better spirits
and helped them to await with more patience the coming of night.

The evening proved disappointing. The sun set behind black clouds that
came up from the west. The water was calm, the air still and oppressive,
and above the ridges lightning flashed. The prospect of making a start
across the open lake was not good. Yet in one way the threatening weather
served the lads well. The night was intensely dark. The lightning was too
far away to illuminate land or water, and this black darkness furnished
good cover. When they pushed off from the little island, they could see
scarcely a boat’s length ahead.

Close to the shores of the islands and the long point, they paddled,
avoiding wide spaces, which were, even on this dark night, considerably
lighter than the land-shadowed water. As he sat in the stern trying to
dip and raise his paddle as noiselessly as his half-brother in the bow,
Hugh felt that the very bay had somehow changed its character. That
morning the place had seemed peaceful and beautiful, but to-night it had
turned sinister and threatening. The low hanging, starless sky, the dark,
wooded islands, the towering ridge, its topmost line of tree spires a
black, jagged line against the pale flashes of lightning, the still,
lifeless water, the intense silence broken only by the far-away rumble of
thunder and the occasional high-pitched, squeaking cry of some night
bird, all seemed instinct with menace. The boy felt that at any moment a
swift canoe, with the gigantic figure of Ohrante towering in the bow,
might dart out of some black shadow. Frankly Hugh was frightened, and he
knew it. But the knowledge only made him set his teeth hard, gaze keenly
and intently into the darkness about him and ply his paddle with the
utmost care. What his half-brother’s feelings were he could not guess. He
only knew that Blaise was paddling steadily and silently.

In the thick darkness, the older boy was not quite sure of the way back
to the hidden pond, but Blaise showed no doubt or hesitation. He found
the channel between the point and the chain of islands, and warned Hugh
just when to turn through the gap into the inner channel. When it came to
feeling the way past the round islet and through the narrow passage, Hugh
ceased paddling and trusted entirely to Blaise. The latter strained his
eyes in the effort to see into the darkness, but so black was it on every
hand that even he had to depend more on feeling with his paddle blade
than on his sense of sight. It was partly luck that he succeeded in
taking the boat through without worse accident than grating a rock. He
did not attempt to cross the little pond, but ran the bateau up on the
pebbles just beyond the entrance.

Hugh drew a long sigh of relief. They were back safe in the hidden pond
near the cache of furs. The sense of menace that had oppressed him was
suddenly lifted, and he felt an overpowering physical and mental
weariness. Blaise must have had some similar feeling, for he had not a
word to say as they climbed out of the bateau and pulled it farther up.
In silence he lay down beside Hugh in the bottom of the boat. In spite of
the rumbling of the thunder, and the flashing of the lightning, the two
boys fell asleep immediately.

The storm passed around and no rain fell, but the sleepers were awakened
towards dawn by a sharp change in the weather. The air had turned cold,
wind rustled the trees, broken clouds were scudding across the sky
uncovering clear patches. The morning dawned bright. The little pond was
still, but it was impossible to tell what the weather might be outside.
The only way to find out was to go see. Their adventure of the day before
had made the boys more than ever anxious to get away from Isle Royale at
the first possible moment. Yet the thought that Ohrante might be lurking
somewhere near made them cautious. They hesitated to leave their hiding
place until they were sure they could strike out across the lake. To load
the furs and start out, only to be obliged to turn back, seemed a double
risk.

“If the lake is rough it is likely that Ohrante and his band have not
gone far,” Blaise remarked. “They may be in this very bay.”

“That does not follow,” Hugh replied quickly and with better reasoning.
“There was a long interval between the time when we saw them and the
coming of the storm-clouds. Because the lake was rough in the morning is
no sign it was rough all day. They must have come in here from somewhere,
and we know that the wind changed. The water in the bay was as still as
glass last night. Ohrante was surely well frightened and I have little
doubt they made good speed away from the Bay of Spirits.” Hugh was silent
for a few moments. Then he asked abruptly, “What would happen if we
should encounter Ohrante? He can’t know what brought us here, and we have
done him no harm. Why should he harm us when he has nothing against us?”

“He has this against us, that we are the sons of Jean Beaupré.”

“He doesn’t know we are.”

“He knows me. He has seen me more than once and knows me for the son of
my father. Ohrante forgets not those he has seen.”

“I didn’t know he knew you. He can’t know me. Probably he doesn’t even
know that father had another son. I’ll go alone in the bateau, Blaise,
down the channel, and see how the lake looks.”

“No, no,” Blaise objected. “You must not take such a risk. If you go out
there, I will go too.”

“That would spoil the whole plan. If Ohrante catches sight of you, it
will be all up with both of us. He doesn’t know me. If he glimpses me, he
may even be afraid to show himself. He may think me one of a party of
white men, and he is a fugitive from justice.”

Blaise shook his head doubtfully.

“Well, at any rate,” Hugh protested, “I shall have a better chance if you
aren’t with me. I don’t believe I shall see anything of Ohrante or his
men, but I run less risk alone. I will be cautious. I’ll not expose
myself more than I can help. Instead of going out along the point by
water, I’ll paddle across the channel and then take to the woods. I can
climb to the top of the ridge, under cover all the way, and look out
across the lake. It can’t be very far up there. I shall be back in an
hour. You must stay here and guard the furs.”

The expression of the younger lad’s face betrayed that he did not like
this new plan much better than the first one, but he voiced no further
objection.

Hugh pushed off the bateau, waved his hand to the sober-faced Blaise, and
paddled through the narrow waterway and out of sight. After his brother
had gone, Blaise picked his way along the shore of the pond and into the
woods to the cache. He found no signs of disturbance around the old
birch, and, climbing up, he looked down into the hollow. The rotten wood
and dead leaves he and Hugh had strewn over the bark cover seemed
undisturbed. Satisfied that the furs were safe, Blaise climbed down
again. He was reminded though that Hugh still had the packet. He wished
he had asked his elder brother to leave it behind.

The half-breed boy waited with the patience inherited from his Indian
mother. But when the sun reached its highest point he began to wonder.
Surely it could not take Hugh so long to cross to the point, climb to the
top and return. From experience of untracked woods and rough ridges,
Blaise knew the trip was probably a harder one than Hugh had imagined,
but the latter was not inexperienced in rough going. Unless he had
encountered extraordinary difficulties, had been obliged to go far
around, or had become lost, he should have been back long before. The
possibility that Hugh had become lost, Blaise dismissed from his mind at
once. With the ridge ahead and the water behind him, only the very
stupidest of men could have lost himself in daylight. That he had come to
some crack or chasm he could not cross or some cliff he could not scale,
and had been compelled to go far out of his way, was possible. Blaise had
come to know Hugh’s stubborn nature. If he had started to go to the top
of the ridge, there he would go, if it was in the power of possibility.

There seemed to be nothing Blaise could do but wait. Even if he had
thought it wise to follow his elder brother, he had no boat. Sunset came
and still no Hugh. The lad felt he could delay action no longer.

The pond was in the interior of a small island. Blaise made up his mind
to cross to the shore bordering on the channel that separated the island
from the long point. Through the woods he took as direct a route as he
could. The growth was thick, but there was still plenty of light. In a
very few minutes he saw the gleam of water among the trees ahead. He
slipped through cautiously, not to expose himself until he had taken
observations. His body concealed by a thick alder bush, he looked across
the strip of water, studying the opposite shore line.

The shore was in shadow now and the trees grew to the water. Letting his
eyes travel along foot by foot, he caught sight of the thing he sought, a
bit of weather-stained wood, not the trunk or branch of a dead tree,
projecting a little way from the shadow of a cedar. That was the end of
the bateau. Hugh had crossed the channel, had left his boat and gone into
the woods.

Slipping between the bushes, Blaise glanced along his own side of the
channel, then made his way quickly to the spot where a birch tree had
toppled from its insecure hold into the water. With his sharp hatchet,
the boy quickly severed the roots that were mooring the fallen tree to
the shore. Then, with some difficulty, he succeeded in shoving the birch
farther out into the channel and climbing on the trunk. His weight, as he
sat astride the tree trunk between the branches, pulled it down a little,
but the upper part of his body was well above water. The channel was
deep, with some current, which caught the tree and floated it away from
shore. Like most woods Indians and white voyageurs, Blaise was not
skilled in swimming, but the water was calm and, as long as he clung to
his strange craft, he was in no danger of drowning. Leaning forward, he
cut off a branch to use as a paddle and with it was able to make slow
headway across. He could not guide himself very well, and the current
bore him down. He succeeded with his branch paddle in keeping the tree
from turning around, however. It went ashore, the boughs catching in a
bush that grew on the water’s edge, some distance below the spot where
the bateau was drawn up in the shelter of the leaning cedar.




                                  XXI
                          THE GRINNING INDIAN


When Hugh passed out of the narrow channel into the wider one, he ran his
eyes searchingly along the opposite shore, alert for any signs of human
beings. Then he looked to the right and left, up and down the channel and
the shores of the small islands. He saw nothing to cause him
apprehension. Putting more strength into his paddle strokes, he crossed
as quickly as he could, and ran the bateau in beside a leaning cedar tree
with branches that swept the water. The bow touched the shore, and Hugh
climbed out and made the boat fast. He felt sure it would be concealed
from down channel by the thick foliage of the cedar. From up channel the
bateau was not so well hidden, but this place seemed to be the only spot
that offered any concealment whatever, so he was forced to be content. He
would not be gone long anyway, and he was well satisfied that Ohrante and
his band would not return soon to the Bay of Manitos.

This was by no means the first time Hugh had been through untracked woods
and over rough ground, yet he found the trip to the ridge top longer and
more difficult than he had expected. The growth, principally of
evergreens, was dense and often troublesome to push through. The bedrock,
a few feet from shore, was covered deeply with soft leaf mould and
decayed wood and litter, forming a treacherous footing. Sometimes he
found it firm beneath his feet, again he would sink half-way to his
knees. Wherever a tree had fallen, lightening the dense shade, tangles of
ground yew had sprung up. The rise on this side of the point was gradual
compared with the abrupt cliffs of the northwest side, but the slope
proved to be, not an unbroken grade, but an irregular succession of low
ridges with shallow gullies between. By the general upward trend,
occasional glimpses of the water behind him, and the angle at which the
sunlight came through the trees, Hugh kept his main direction, going in
as straight a line as he could. Under ordinary circumstances he would
have used his hatchet to blaze his way, so that he might be sure of
returning by the same route, but he hesitated to leave so plain a trail.
It was not likely that Ohrante would come across the track, but Hugh was
taking no chances. If the giant Iroquois should come down the channel and
find the bateau, a blazed trail into the woods would make pursuit
altogether too easy. Though he was in too great a hurry to take any
particular care to avoid leaving footprints, Hugh did not mark his trail
intentionally and even refrained from cutting his way through the thick
places. The whole distance from the shore to the summit of the highest
ridge probably did not exceed a mile, and did not actually take as long
as it seemed in the climbing.

He hoped that he might come out in a bare spot where he could see across
the water, but he was disappointed. The ridge was almost flat topped and
trees cut off his view in every direction. Going on across the summit,
however, he pushed his way among the growth, to find himself standing on
the very rim of an almost vertical descent. He looked directly down upon
the tops of the sturdy trees and shrubs that clung to the rock by
thrusting their roots far into holes and crannies. Beyond stretched the
lake, rich blue under a clear sky. A little to his left, a projecting
block of rock a few feet below offered a chance for a better view. He let
himself down on the rock and took an observation. The lake was not too
rough to venture out upon, when the need of crossing was so great. He
noted with satisfaction that the breeze was only moderate. The direction,
a little east of north, was not unfavorable for reaching the mainland,
though steering a straight course for the Kaministikwia would be
impossible.

Hugh turned to climb back the way he had come down. He gave a gasp,
almost lost his footing, and seized a sturdy juniper root to keep himself
from falling. Directly above him, on the verge of the ridge, stood a
strange man, from his features, dark skin and long black hair evidently
an Indian,—but not Ohrante. It flashed through Hugh’s mind that on level
ground he might be a match for this fellow. They were not on level ground
though. The Indian had the advantage of position. Moreover Hugh’s only
arms were the hatchet and knife in his belt. The Indian carried a musket
ready in his hand. That he realized to the full his advantage was proved
by the malicious grin on his bronze face. There was no friendliness in
that grin, only malevolence and vindictiveness.

Hugh knew himself to be in a bad position. Probably the Indian was one of
Ohrante’s followers, and they were a wild crew, outlaws and renegades,
their hand against every man and every man’s hand against them. The
picture of the prisoner being tortured in the firelight crossed the boy’s
mind in a vivid flash, and a shudder crept up his back. Then the grin on
the Indian’s face sent a wave of anger over Hugh that steadied him. He
must be cool at all costs and not show fear.

Moving a step, to a more secure footing, he looked the fellow straight in
the eyes. “Bo jou,” Hugh said, using the corruption of the French “Bon
jour” common among traders and Indians.

“Bo jou, white man,” the other replied in French.

Both were silent for a moment. Hugh did not know what to say next and the
Indian seemed content to say nothing. Suddenly Hugh made up his mind,
resolving on a bold course.

“What is this place?” he asked. “Is it island or mainland?”

“Ne compr’ney,” was the only answer.

Hugh took the phrase to be an attempt to say that the other did not
understand. He repeated his questions in French, then tried English, but
the Indian merely stared at him, the sardonic grin still distorting his
lips, and replied in the same manner. Either he really did not
understand, the two French phrases being all the white man’s speech he
knew, or he did not wish to talk. Yet Hugh made another attempt at
conversation.

“I was driven here in the storm last night,” he volunteered, “and my
canoe wrecked and my companion drowned. We were on our way down shore
from the New Fort with our winter supplies, but they are all lost. What
is this place? I never saw it before and I do not like it. This morning I
heard strange sounds, unlike any I ever heard made by man or animal. The
devil was at large I think,” and he crossed himself in the French manner.

During the speech Hugh had kept his eyes closely fixed on the Indian’s
face. He thought when he mentioned the strange sounds that he detected a
quiver of interest, but it was gone in an instant. The fellow merely
repeated his singsong “Ne compr’ney.” There was no use saying more.
Determined not to show that he expected or feared any violence, Hugh
started to climb up the projecting rock. Somewhat to the boy’s surprise,
the Indian made no move to stop him. However, he kept his gun ready for
instant use.

After gaining the top Hugh was in a quandary how to proceed. He did not
believe the man’s intentions were friendly. Would it be wise to strike
first? At the thought, his hand, almost unconsciously, sought his knife.
Before he could grasp the handle, the Indian made a swift movement, and
the end of the musket barrel rested against Hugh’s chest. The flint-lock
musket was primed and cocked, ready to fire. Resistance was useless. Hugh
stood motionless, looked the fellow in the eye and feigned anger.

“What do you mean?” he cried, trying to make his meaning plain by his
voice and manner even though his captor could not understand the words.
“What do you mean by threatening me, a white man, with your musket?”

The gun was moved back a trifle, but the bronze face continued to grin
maliciously. To show that he was not afraid, Hugh took a step forward,
and opened his mouth to speak again, but the words were not uttered. As
his weight shifted to his forward foot, he was seized from behind, and
thrown sidewise, his head crashing against the trunk of a tree.




                                  XXII
                      BLAISE FOLLOWS HUGH’S TRAIL


Blaise had no difficulty finding the place where Hugh had gone into the
woods. The white boy thought he had been careful about leaving a trail,
but to the half-breed lad the indications were plain enough. Most of the
tracks were such as might have been made by any large animal, but Blaise
knew Hugh had landed at this spot intending to go directly to the ridge
top. The younger boy was confident that trampled undergrowth, prints in
the leaf mould, freshly broken branches, were all signs of his brother’s
passage.

At first he followed the trail easily, but the long northern twilight was
waning. As the darkness gathered in the woods, tracking grew increasingly
difficult. Blaise had no wish to attract attention by lighting a torch.
As he penetrated the thick growth, he was not only unable to find Hugh’s
trail, but was obliged sometimes to feel his own way and was in grave
doubt whether he was going aright. Coming out into a more open spot,
where several trees had fallen, he examined, as well as he could in the
dim light, the moss-covered trunks for some sign that Hugh had climbed
over them. A fresh break where the decayed wood had crumbled away under
foot, a patch of bruised moss, the delicate fruiting stalks broken and
crushed, were enough to convince him that he was still on the right
track.

Alternately losing the trail and finding it again, he came to the summit
of the ridge. Crossing the top, he found himself on the rim of the cliff,
but not in the same spot where his brother had come out. He had missed
Hugh’s trail on the last upward slope, and was now a hundred feet or more
to the left of the projecting block of rock. For a few minutes Blaise
stood looking about him. He glanced out over the water, noting that the
sky was partly cloud covered. He could make out the low point, and he
realized that the rock shore with the fissures must lie almost directly
below him. The twin coves, where he and Hugh had camped, could not be far
to the left. Blaise was not concerned just now with either place, he was
merely obeying the Indian instinct to note his whereabouts and to take
his bearings.

The lad was at a loss how to proceed. That Hugh had reached the rim of
the ridge somewhere along here seemed more than probable. Where had he
gone then? Blaise could scarcely believe that his elder brother had
attempted to climb down that abrupt descent. If he had gone down there
and through the woods and over the rocks to the water, he could have got
no better view of the open lake,—and Hugh had been in haste. No, he had
certainly not gone down there of his own accord. If he had started back
the way he had come, what had happened to him? Blaise shook his head in
perplexity. Of only one thing was he sure. Some disaster had overtaken
Hugh. Had he made a misstep and plunged down the cliff, or had Ohrante
something to do with his disappearance?

The first thing to do, Blaise decided, was to search along the ridge top
for some further sign of Hugh or of what had befallen him. He turned to
the right and made his way along as close to the edge as he could,
stooping down every few paces to seek for some clue. The night was
lighter now, for the moon had come out from behind the clouds. When he
reached the spot just above the projecting rocks, Blaise stopped still.
There was no need to search for signs here, they were quite plain. The
moon shone down on the little open space where Hugh and the strange
Indian had confronted one another. It was clear to the half-breed boy
that there had been a struggle. The gray caribou moss was crushed and
trampled and torn up by the roots. A branch of a little jackpine on the
edge of the opening showed a fresh break and hanging from that branch was
a torn scrap of deerskin. But that was not all. Lying on the moss, in
plain sight in the moonlight, was a small, dark object, a bit of steel
such as was commonly used with a piece of flint for fire making. Blaise
picked up the steel. It was the one Hugh carried, beyond doubt.

What did those marks of struggle mean? They were too far back to indicate
that Hugh had lost his footing and slipped over the edge, seizing the
tree to keep himself from falling. No, that was quite impossible, for the
jackpine grew at least ten feet from the rim of the cliff. Had Hugh
fought with some animal? Blaise knew of no animal likely, at that season
of the year, to make an unprovoked attack upon a man. He felt sure that
Hugh had too much sense to strike first with knife or hatchet at a bear
or moose. Moreover if an animal had slain him it would scarcely have
carried him away. Every indication pointed to an encounter, not with a
beast, but with a man. Hugh must have come across Ohrante or some of his
followers. Had they killed him or taken him prisoner? If they had killed
him they would not have troubled to take away his body. They would have
taken his scalp and gone on their way,—unless of course they had thrown
him over the cliff. Blaise looked down the abrupt descent, now bathed in
moonlight. Should he seek down there for Hugh or in some other direction?
He decided to look around a little more before attempting to climb down.

Almost immediately he found further traces. Beyond the jackpine more
crushed moss and broken bushes and trampled undergrowth showed plainly
that someone, more than one man probably, had gone that way not many
hours before, had gone boldly and confidently, careless of leaving a
trail. Blaise dropped on his knees to make a closer examination. The
moonlight helped him, and he soon came to the conclusion, from the shape
of a footprint impressed clearly in a bit of loose earth, that one man at
least had gone in that direction, whether he had come that way or not.
The print was too large for Hugh’s foot, but, a little farther on, Blaise
found another smaller track that he thought might be Hugh’s. It pointed
the same way as the larger print.

The beginning of the trail was now plain, but could he follow it in the
darkness of the woods? He must try anyway. He would go as far as he
could, taking care not to lose the tracks.

Blaise did not succeed in following far. No longer was he aided by any
knowledge of the general direction those he was pursuing would be likely
to take. Under the trees the moonlight was of little assistance. He soon
lost the tracks and was compelled to go back to the starting point. He
tried again and lost the trail a second time. A white boy, in his anxiety
and impatience, would probably have persisted in the hopeless attempt,
and would have lost the trail and himself. But Blaise was part Indian.
Anxious though he was over Hugh’s fate, he knew when to wait as well as
when to go forward. By daylight he could doubtless find the trail easily,
and could cover in a few minutes ground that in darkness might take him
hours, if he could find his way over it at all. He seated himself on a
cushion of dry caribou moss near the rim of the ridge to wait,
sleeplessly and watchfully.

Dawn came at last. When the light was strong enough to make it possible
to find his way through the woods, Blaise again took up the trail. The
tracks he had started to follow and had lost in the first bit of dense
growth, led him, not through, but around the thick place, into a sort of
open rock lane bordered with trees and running along the ridge top. To
his great surprise, when he reached the end of the open stretch, he came
upon a clearly defined trail. It was not merely a track made by one or
two men coming and going once. It gave evidence of having been travelled
a number of times. The soft moccasins of the Indian do not wear a path as
quickly as the boots of the white man, but this trail was well enough
trodden to be followed easily. No blazes marked the trees and no clearing
had been done other than the breaking or hacking off of an occasional
troublesome branch. The men who made that trail had gone around the
obstacles, instead of cutting through or removing them, but any white man
who knew anything of woods’ running could have followed it.

The half-breed boy hastened along without hesitation, scarcely thinking
of the trail itself, but with eyes and ears open for signs of other human
beings. That travelled way must lead, he felt sure, to some more or less
permanent camp. Had Hugh fallen into Ohrante’s hands or into those of
some tribe of permanent inhabitants of Minong? Blaise hoped heartily that
it might be the latter. Even if they were inclined to be hostile, he
feared such an unknown people less than he did the too well known
Iroquois.

Going noiselessly, with every sense alert, the boy caught sight of
something moving among the trees ahead. Instantly he dropped to the
ground and slipped like a snake among trees and bushes and through
undergrowth to the left of the trail. Behind a dense clump of balsams
that had sprung up about a parent tree, he lay motionless. When he
thought he had waited long enough, he crept cautiously back towards the
trail. Moving bushes a little distance away in the direction from which
he had come, a glimpse of a black head told the boy he had just missed an
encounter.

A short distance farther on, the trail turned to the right and plunged
down an abrupt descent. Then the way wound up and down over low ridges,
the outer slopes of which were steep to abruptness, and through boggy
ravines with thick growth and treacherous moss and mud. Following a
general downward trend, the trail led at last to almost level ground. Now
Blaise went forward with the utmost caution, for he felt that the end
must be near at hand. On this lower ground, near the water, the village
or camp must be situated. Presently the lad stopped, stood still and
sniffed the air. He smelled smoke.




                                 XXIII
                               A CAPTIVE


Hugh’s fall stunned him for a moment, and that moment was his undoing.
When he came to himself, he was propped against the tree, his knife and
hatchet gone. Two Indians were binding his wrists with a rawhide rope.
Dizzy, his head spinning, he fought to free himself, but to no avail. The
knots were tied, and he struggled to his feet to confront the malicious
grin of the young Indian whom he had first encountered, and the ugly,
lowering face of another, older savage of short, squat figure. It must
have been this fellow’s long, strong arms that had seized and thrown the
boy. Recovering himself a little, Hugh looked desperately about for a way
of escape. His captors understood that glance. The squat man seized his
arm in a grip that almost made the boy cry out, while the young fellow,
who had picked up his long gun, raised it threateningly.

In spite of his aching head, the sickness at his stomach and a general
feeling of misery and despair, physical and mental, the boy made an
heroic effort to stand erect and, with calm and impassive face, look his
enemies in the eye. He knew that to show weakness or fear would only make
matters worse. He must assume an indifference and unconcern he was far
from feeling, at the same time keeping alert for any chance of gaining an
advantage.

He was not left long in doubt of his captors’ immediate intentions. With
a guttural grunt, the man who held his arm turned him about and led him
around the jackpine, the other following, musket ready. They went through
the woods, and came out into an open rock lane bordered with trees and
bushes. There they turned to the right. It was of no use to struggle.
Hugh had no chance to get away. Even if he had been able to break loose
from the iron grip of the squat man, or, by thrusting out a foot, trip
him and twist himself from the Indian’s grasp, he could not hope to
escape the fellow with the gun. The latter would most certainly have shot
him or clubbed him into unconsciousness.

Hugh went in silence, until they entered a trail leading from the open
lane. Then he attempted a question. “Where do you take me, to whom?” he
asked.

Receiving no answer but the young fellow’s singsong “Ne compr’ney” and a
sullen grunt from the older savage, the boy made another attempt. Loudly
and vigorously, to make his anger clear by his voice and manner, he
uttered an indignant protest. What did they mean by such treatment of a
white man of peaceable and friendly intentions, who had never done wrong
to them or to any other Ojibwa? He voiced his indignation in both English
and French, apparently without effect, except to cause the squat Indian
to tighten his grip and the grinning one to prod the captive in the back
with his musket.

Curiously enough, that prod, instead of frightening the lad, made him
blaze with anger. The blood surged to his face. With difficulty he
restrained himself from turning to give battle. But one cool spot in his
brain told him that such an act would be suicide. He must keep his wrath
under control and use guile instead of force, if he was ever to see
Blaise again and escape with their joint inheritance. So he controlled
himself and went quietly where his captors led him. Questions and
protests were worse than useless.

It was not a path they were following, merely a trail trodden down more
or less by use. As Indians and woodsmen always go single file, the way
was narrow. The squat Indian went ahead, the end of the rawhide that
bound Hugh’s wrists wrapped about his hand. He went rapidly, and Hugh,
his arms extended in front of him, had to step quickly to keep from being
dragged. Behind him the other man gave him an occasional reminder by
touching him between the shoulders with the gun barrel. Every time he
felt that touch, wrath surged up in Hugh. The boy would have been less
than human if he had not been afraid of the fate in store for him, but he
was proving himself the true son of his father. Every threat or insult
produced in him a hot anger that, for the moment, completely blotted out
fear. Yet he strove to hold himself in check, to keep calm and silent and
to appear unconscious of the fellow behind him.

Had Hugh not been active and light-footed, he could not have kept pace
with his guards on the rough and winding trail. The squat Indian showed
not the slightest consideration for his captive. Hugh knew that if he
lagged, tripped or fell, he would be dragged along regardless of his
comfort. In addition he would probably be kicked or prodded by the man
behind. So he exerted himself to keep up the swift pace with truly Indian
agility.

The trail turned to the right and led to the edge of an abrupt decline.
The older Indian let go his hold of the boy, to climb down, but the other
man kept the muzzle of his gun between Hugh’s shoulders. The lad wondered
if the two expected him to go down that almost vertical descent with
bound arms. He was still wondering when the Indian in front reached the
bottom. The man in the rear, without warning, suddenly seized the boy
about the waist, swung him off his feet, and literally dropped him over
the edge.

Hugh went sliding down, trying to save himself from too rapid a descent
by gripping the rock with his moccasined feet. In a flash he saw that he
would land right in the arms of the man at the bottom. If he could only
strike the Indian in the stomach with enough force to knock him down, and
then dodge aside swiftly before the other fellow could pick up his gun
again—— Far more quickly than it can be told the plan was born in the
boy’s mind. The squat Indian’s long arms were stretched out and up. His
powerful hands gripped Hugh. The lad tried to throw himself forward, but
the sturdy figure stood firm. The Indian swung Hugh around, and in an
instant had him flat on his back in a tangle of prickly juniper. The
captive’s one attempt to escape had failed.

Bruised and battered by his slide down the rocks, Hugh was jerked to his
feet. The younger savage was beside him now, ready to take up his
position in the rear. The two wasted no time. The older man gripped the
rawhide again and the march was resumed. Speed was not slackened even in
the steep places, and Hugh was put to it to keep up and not lose his
footing. The general course was downward, until they reached almost level
ground, thickly wooded with evergreens, where the trail led over many
fallen tree trunks, decayed and moss covered. Then they went up a few
feet of rise, like a low and ruinous rock wall. To his left among the
trees, Hugh could see the gleam of water.

The squat Indian sprang down from the natural wall, and Hugh leaped with
him, to avoid being dragged down. He found himself almost on a level with
the water, among scattering broad-leaved trees and bushes. A few steps
farther and, rounding a clump of mountain ash, he came in sight of a
small birch bark lodge, of the conical wigwam form sometimes used by the
Ojibwas for temporary dwellings to be occupied a few days or a week or
two. The more permanent lodges were commonly of a different shape with
rounded roofs. In a moment another, slightly larger wigwam came in view.
A thin curl of smoke rose from the remains of a fire, and a canoe lay on
the sand beach. No human beings were to be seen.

The two Indians marched their captive to the cleared spot where the fire
smouldered. Then, before the boy realized his intention, the squat man
turned quickly, put his arm about Hugh’s waist, tripping him cleverly at
the same time, threw him backwards to the ground and sat upon him.
Without a word spoken, the grinning savage dropped his musket, seized a
strip of rawhide and set to work to tie the prisoner’s ankles together.
Hugh attempted to kick, but the squat man prodded him unmercifully in the
stomach. The boy realized that he could not help matters by struggling.
The younger Indian completed his work, rose to his feet and grinned down
at him derisively. The older man tested the cord on Hugh’s wrists, pulled
it a little tighter and got to his feet, to the great relief of the sore
and suffering captive. The squat Indian was heavily built, and Hugh felt
that a few moments more of that weight on his middle would crush him
flat. He strove to control his features, however, and not to let his
misery, indignation and despair show in his face.

Evidently the pair considered their work completed, or perhaps they had
tired of tormenting the prisoner. At any rate they left him to himself.
For a time Hugh lay perfectly still, too miserable for effort of body or
mind. His head still pained him from the fall against the tree, he had
several sore bruises on his body, his arms and shoulders ached from being
held so long in one position, the thongs cut into his wrists and ankles,
and he was sick at the stomach from the treatment he had just received.
As he lay on his back, his captors were no longer within his range of
vision, but he did not flatter himself that he was unwatched. That the
two were not far away he knew from the sound of their voices that came to
him at intervals from somewhere down by the water. There was no need for
them to watch him closely, he thought bitterly. Bound as he was and
unable to even raise himself to his feet, he had not the slightest chance
of escape.

After a while he began to feel better, and his hopes rose a little.
Turning his head from side to side, he looked about for some way to help
himself. He could no longer hear the voices of the Indians nor could he
catch any glimpse of them. Everything about him was quiet, except for the
ripple of the water on the sand and gravel of the beach, and the
occasional cries of a small flock of gulls.

There was something familiar about this spot, this stretch of sandy
ground, with its sparse growth of trees and bushes, and its curving
beach. Beyond and above, the tree-covered ridges towered. Hugh managed to
roll over on his side, and looked across a narrow blue channel to another
thickly wooded shore, where the trees ran down to the water. He knew the
place now. On that stretch of sand and pebbles, Captain Bennett had
beached the _Otter_. Hugh himself had helped to clear the very spot where
the wigwams now stood. The place looked somewhat different, to be sure,
with all the ice and snow gone and the trees and bushes in full summer
green.

Hugh’s thoughts turned from the memory of that other camp to the present
situation. He pulled at the thongs that bound him and tried to loosen
them by wriggling his hands and feet, but it was of no use. The cords,
instead of loosening, only cut into his wrists and ankles more painfully.
He was just about to attempt to sit up, when the gruff voice of the older
of his captors sounded close by, just beyond his head. Hugh composed
himself to lie still. The Indian came near and looked down frowningly on
the lad, then seated himself at a little distance and went to work on a
piece of deerskin he was fashioning into moccasins. Hugh was familiar
enough with Indian ways to grasp the significance of the fact that the
man was making his own moccasins. That was women’s work, if there were
women about. It was evident that in this camp there were no squaws, or
the braves would not be doing squaws’ work.

Growing tired of watching his guard at his task, Hugh closed his eyes.
The sun was warm and in this sheltered place there was little breeze. He
felt very tired and all things around him conspired to make him drowsy.
In a few minutes the captive had fallen fast asleep.




                                  XXIV
                       IN THE HANDS OF THE GIANT


The sound of voices waked Hugh. He opened his eyes to find, looking down
on him, the young Indian and a repulsive fellow with a strip of dirty red
cloth bound about his black hair. The latter had evidently just come from
visiting his snares, for he was carrying two rabbits. When he saw that
Hugh was awake, he turned away, the young fellow, after favoring the boy
with another of his malicious grins, following him. From the position of
the sun Hugh knew that he had not slept long, but his head felt better
and the sick feeling had passed.

Long and tedious hours of waiting followed. At least one of the Indians
was in sight and hearing every moment. Hugh was hungry, but he was
offered no food, thirsty, but he disdained to ask for a drink. He strove
to lie quiet and to keep his feelings of discomfort, anxiety and
apprehension from his face. The ground was hard, the sun beat down upon
his head and face, and he could not move to a more comfortable spot. Only
with difficulty could he roll over on his side. His mental suffering,
however, was far worse than his physical discomfort and pain.

Why was he treated in this way? Into whose hands had he fallen? What were
they going to do to him and for what or whom were they waiting? The one
possible explanation of his treatment was that he had fallen into the
hands of Ohrante’s little band of outlaws. Why should even they want to
take him prisoner? Was Ohrante looking for the hidden cache? A cold chill
ran up Hugh’s spine, as he remembered the packet in the breast of his
shirt. If he had only had sense enough to leave that packet with Blaise!
It must surely come to light should his captors strip him to torment or
torture him. Torture! He recalled the fiendish scene in the firelight.
Was that what it meant to fall into the hands of the giant Iroquois? The
boy dared not think of that. He tried to assure himself that the outlaw
had nothing against him. At any rate he must not give way to fear. If he
could keep cool and alert, he might yet find some way out of the perils
that threatened him. He _must_ find a way.

With such thoughts running through his head, the time dragged painfully.
Late in the afternoon, the younger Indian renewed the fire and hung over
it an iron pot of water. Into the pot he put several handfuls of wild
rice and rabbit meat cut into small pieces. The odor was tempting to
Hugh’s nostrils, but he strove to keep his hunger from showing in his
face.

Sunset came. The stew was ready, but the pot was not unslung. The three
Indians sat about the fire, the younger one whiling away the time by
playing on a crude native flute with three holes. The sounds produced
were mournful and monotonous and did not inspire cheerfulness. The other
two savages sat idle, eying the seething mixture in the kettle, but none
made a move to dip into it. They were certainly waiting for the return of
the rest of the band. Unusually well disciplined savages, Hugh thought
them, to postpone their own supper until their chief arrived.

The squat man turned his head, gave a little grunt, rose and walked away
towards the beach. The young fellow ceased his flute playing and
followed, the other remaining to watch the stew. Hugh heard a canoe grate
lightly on the gravel, a few words exchanged. He rolled over on his side,
and saw, striding towards him—Ohrante. There could be no mistaking that
huge form, looking more gigantic than ever as it towered over the
prostrate lad.

For an instant Hugh forgot all else in wonder at the Indian’s size.
Ohrante was not less than seven feet in height, with proportionate
breadth of shoulder and depth of chest. Then, as he gazed into the face
looking down on him, a veritable panic of fear shook the lad. It was not
an ugly face. In its outlines and proportions, its strongly cut, regular
features, it was unusually handsome for an Indian. But there was an
inhuman hardness about it, a fiercely piercing quality in the eyes, cruel
lines about nostrils and lips, a general expression of bitter and
vindictive malevolence that appalled the boy. A shudder passed through
him, yet, fascinated, he could not take his eyes from the dark, piercing
ones.

Ohrante spoke, and Hugh gave a start of surprise. It was not the words
that amazed him. All the Indian said was, “Who are you, white man? How
come you here?” A simple question in curiously accented English. It was
the voice that surprised Hugh. Weak, high pitched, almost squeaking, such
a voice as the boy had never heard in an Indian before, it was
ludicrously incongruous with the size and appearance of the evil giant.
Instantly the spell in which Ohrante had held him was broken. So great
was the revulsion of feeling that Hugh actually wanted to laugh. Luckily
he realized that to take any notice of the giant’s weak point would
surely arouse his bitterest hatred. Self-possession regained, Hugh
controlled his features and answered steadily. He had had plenty of time
that long afternoon to plan the story he was to tell.

“I am Hugh McNair. I came here by accident. High winds drove me out of my
course and against the great rocks yonder.” He jerked his head in the
direction of the mouth of the bay. “My canoe was wrecked, all my winter
supplies lost, my comrade drowned.” He paused, rather surprised at the
readiness with which he told his false tale. Ordinarily Hugh was
truthful, inclined to regard a lie as a coward’s refuge, but he had no
intention of divulging his true name and purpose to his father’s
bitterest enemy.

Ohrante seemed to consider the reply. Then he spoke again. “Minong far
from mainland,” he said in his bad English. He was suspicious of the
tale, but the boy was prepared for doubt.

“We were going from the New Fort at the Kaministikwia,” Hugh went on to
explain. “We had sold our furs and had all our supplies for the winter.
Also we were very sleepy. We had drunk deep and we did not take care
where we went. Then came the wind.”

Hugh was watching Ohrante’s face closely, but he could not tell whether
the Iroquois believed the story or not, or indeed how much of it he
understood. He made no reply except a queer little sound in his throat.
Because of his high-pitched voice, that sound could not be called a
grunt, and Hugh was at a loss to know whether it meant assent, disbelief
or contempt. Before he could add anything more to his story, the giant
turned abruptly away, walked over to the fire and seated himself on a
log.

Immediately one of his followers removed the pot, and, with a
long-handled, crudely carved wooden spoon, ladled out a generous portion
of the stew into a birch bark dish. The chief received the dish in
silence and commenced to eat, picking out the bits of meat on the point
of his knife, and taking up the rice on the flat of the blade. After he
had finished the more solid part of the food, he drank the soup and
passed the dish back to be refilled.

The other Indians, eight in number, stood or sat about in silence. Not
until the chief had finished his second portion and had signified, by
turning the empty dish upside down on the ground, that he had had enough,
did they venture to approach the kettle, each with his own bark or wooden
bowl. Ohrante said something to the squat man who had been one of Hugh’s
captors, pointing to the boy as he spoke. At once the man, carrying his
own dish of stew, went over to the captive, seated himself cross-legged
beside him, took up a piece of meat on the point of his knife and held it
to Hugh’s lips. In this way he fed the lad about half the contents of the
dish, reserving the rest for himself for fear the kettle might be empty.
Neither the wooden dish nor the knife blade was very clean, but Hugh was
too hungry to be particular. He could have eaten more, but he was
thankful to get anything. Whatever the fate in store for him, he was
apparently not to be starved to death. He risked asking for a drink,
making signs to explain his meaning, and the Indian brought him some
water from the lake in a bark cup.

Napoleon Bonaparte (French: Napoléon Bonaparte [napoleɔ̃ bɔnɑpaʁt], Italian: Napoleone Buonaparte; 15 August 1769 – 5 May 1821) was a French military and political leader who rose to prominence during the latter stages of the French Revolution and its associated wars in Europe.
As Napoleon I, he was Emperor of the French from 1804 to 1815, the first monarch of France bearing the title emperor since the reign of Charles the Fat (881-887). His legal reform, the Napoleonic Code, has been a major influence on many civil law jurisdictions worldwide, but he is best remembered for his role in the wars led against France by a series of coalitions, the so-called Napoleonic Wars. He established hegemony over most of continental Europe and sought to spread the ideals of the French Revolution, while consolidating an imperial monarchy which restored aspects of the deposed Ancien Régime. Due to his success in these wars, often against numerically superior enemies, he is generally regarded as one of the greatest military commanders of all time, and his campaigns are studied at military academies worldwide.[1]
Napoleon was born at Ajaccio in Corsica in a family of noble Italian ancestry which had settled Corsica in the 16th century. He trained as an artillery officer in mainland France. He rose to prominence under the French First Republic and led successful campaigns against the First and Second Coalitions arrayed against France. He led a successful invasion of the Italian peninsula.
In 1799, he staged a coup d'état and installed himself as First Consul; five years later the French Senate proclaimed him emperor, following a plebiscite in his favour. He elevated his family to form the Imperial House of France and installed them as rulers of vassal states. In the first decade of the 19th century, the French Empire under Napoleon engaged in a series of conflicts—the Napoleonic Wars—that involved every major European power.[1] After a streak of victories, France secured a dominant position in continental Europe, and Napoleon maintained the French sphere of influence through the formation of extensive alliances and the appointment of friends and family members to rule other European countries as French client states.
The Peninsular War and 1812 French invasion of Russia marked turning points in Napoleon's fortunes. His Grande Armée was badly damaged in the campaign and never fully recovered. In 1813, the Sixth Coalition defeated his forces at Leipzig; the following year the Coalition invaded France, forced Napoleon to abdicate and exiled him to the island of Elba. Less than a year later, he escaped Elba and returned to power, but was defeated at the Battle of Waterloo in June 1815. Napoleon spent the last six years of his life in confinement by the British on the island of Saint Helena. An autopsy concluded he died of stomach cancer, but there has been some debate about the cause of his death, as some scholars have speculated that he was a victim of arsenic poisoning.



Ohrante did not speak to Hugh again that night, or show any further
interest in him. He was left lying bound and was not even given a
blanket. Early in the evening, Ohrante retired alone to the smaller of
the two wigwams, and a little later the others, all except the young
fellow with the malicious grin, crowded into the larger dwelling. The
young Indian, rolled in a dirty blanket, lay down on the opposite side of
the fire from the prisoner.

Hugh’s arms and legs had grown so numb that he no longer felt the galling
of the cords, but he was very sore and uncomfortable from lying on the
hard ground. He had no wish to sleep, he was too eager to find some means
of escape. If he could bring his bonds in contact with a coal from the
fire, he might burn them enough so that he could pull them apart. He
hitched nearer the flickering blaze and turned on his side towards it.
The light was full on the face of the Indian beyond. Hugh could see that
the man’s eyes were open and fixed upon him. His lips were grinning in
the evil fashion the boy knew all too well.

Hugh settled himself as comfortably as he could and closed his eyes.
After what seemed a long time, the deep breathing of the guard seemed to
prove that he slept. The captive opened his eyes and, cautiously and with
painful effort, rolled nearer to the fire. There was a low grunt from the
Indian. He rose, came over to Hugh, seized him by the shoulder and
roughly dragged him back from the fire. Then he passed a skin rope about
the boy’s body under the arms and tied it to a strong young birch. The
rope was long and did not prevent Hugh from lying down and turning from
side to side, but it effectually anchored him too far from the fire to
put his plan into operation. His guard had probably divined his
intention. So ended the captive’s attempt to escape. There was nothing
left for him but to sleep, if he could, and gather strength and courage
for whatever the morrow might bring. It was long before he slept,
however, and the discomfort of his position waked him frequently. At last
the chill of early dawn refused to let him sleep longer.

He had not long to wait before the camp was stirring. The man with the
scarlet head band set about preparing a breakfast of boiled fish. Hugh’s
guard of the night took his gun and went away somewhere. Breakfast was
eaten at sunrise, and this time Hugh’s hands were unbound that he might
feed himself, but he was left tied to the tree. It was some time before
the numbness wore off so that he could use his hands freely. His first
attempts to manage his food amused the Indians, and the boy felt the
blood rise to his cheeks at their grins and unintelligible gibes.

Breakfast was over when the young fellow with the grin returned. He
talked with Ohrante, and afterwards the chief came over to Hugh and began
to ask questions. Again the boy was almost moved to mirth at the contrast
between the giant’s appearance and his voice. As Ohrante went on with his
questioning, however, Hugh almost forgot the ludicrous voice. His replies
kept his wits busy. The Iroquois wanted to know whether Hugh trapped for
himself or traded with others for furs, whether he sold to the Old
Company or to the New, where he intended to winter and other particulars.
Hugh had believed that he had his story well planned, but several of the
questions were unforeseen, and he was obliged to think quickly and invent
as he replied. Telling a false tale was not such a simple matter this
morning, and he was not at all sure that he made his convincing. After
Ohrante turned away, Hugh was left wondering if his answers had allayed
the giant’s suspicions or aroused them.




                                  XXV
                          THE CHIEF OF MINONG


Hugh had expected to learn his fate that morning and had braced himself
for the ordeal, but Ohrante paid no further attention to him. With six of
his band the Iroquois left the camp. From where he sat propped against
the birch trunk, Hugh could see the two canoes start up the bay. His
wrists had been bound again and he was tied to the tree. The squat man
and the ugly fellow with the scarlet head band, who had remained to guard
the captive, evidently considered him so secure that he did not need
close watching. Shortly after the canoe had disappeared, both men went
off somewhere out of sight and hearing.

Now was his chance, thought Hugh, if he could only find some way to loose
his bonds. He pulled and wriggled and twisted, but to no avail. His
captors had done their work too well. His struggles only drew the knots
tighter. He sank back inert and disheartened.

“Take heart.”

The whisper was so low Hugh doubted his ears. He turned his head. Prone
on the ground in the shadow of a willow lay a slim figure, the black head
raised ever so little.

“Blaise!”

The head shook in warning. Wriggling like a snake, Blaise drew close.

“Untie me,” Hugh breathed.

“No, not till night. The guards are too near. When all sleep, I will come
again.”

“That may be too late,” Hugh protested.

“They will do nothing to-day. Ohrante wishes to take you to the mainland,
and to-day the lake is rough. Keep a strong heart, my brother.”

Blaise wriggled back to the shelter of the willows, and was gone without
a sound. He was out of the way none too soon. The guttural voice of the
squat man came to Hugh’s ears. In a few moments both guards were back,
carrying a birch basket of fish.

That day was even longer to Hugh than the preceding one. The sun climbed
and descended so slowly it seemed almost to stand still. Though his
guards left him alone several times, he neither saw nor heard anything
more of Blaise. That did not worry Hugh. He knew that somewhere, not far
away, his younger brother was hiding, awaiting the coming of darkness.
The knowledge put new heart and spirit into the prisoner. If only the
Indians did not capture Blaise, there was a good chance of getting away
safely. Hugh felt sure that he did not need to fear violence from his
captors just yet. Blaise had said that Ohrante meant to carry the
prisoner to the mainland. The lad must have had some good reason for
thinking that. Probably he had overheard the Indians’ conversation. In
this manner the captive, propped against the birch, in the thin shade of
its foliage, speculated on the movements and plans of his captors and his
rescuer. To speculate and plan was all he could do.

About the middle of the afternoon one of the canoes returned with Ohrante
and two of his followers. The men who had remained behind prepared a meal
of the fish they had brought in that morning, boiled in the big kettle.
Hugh was given a portion and his hands were again untied that he might
eat. His pleasure in the fresh lake trout was rather spoiled by its
having been sweetened with maple sugar. He had grown well used to eating
his meat and fish without salt, but he had not learned to enjoy the
Indian custom of using sugar instead.

After the meal, Ohrante again approached the boy. For a few moments the
big man stood looking down at him fixedly and in silence, and Hugh strove
to meet the piercing gaze boldly. Presently the giant began to speak. His
English was bad and interspersed with Indian words, at the meaning of
which Hugh could only guess. His speech, as well as the boy could make it
out, was something like this:

“White man, whether the tale you tell is true or false I know not. When I
look at you I think of a white man I knew and hated and took revenge
upon. Yet you are not like him. Your hair, your eyes are pale. It matters
not. I hate all white men. White men are my enemies. When a white man
falls into my hands I treat him as a great chief should treat his
enemies.” He paused to let the words sink in, his dark face hard as
stone.

The impressiveness and dignity of the chief’s deliberate address were
rather spoiled in effect by his ridiculously weak and broken voice, like
the changing tones of a boy, but Hugh could not fail to perceive the
threat conveyed.

“You are mistaken, great chief,” he replied quietly, using as a bit of
flattery the title Ohrante had given himself. “The white men are not the
enemies of the Indians. They wish the Indians no evil, only good. The
white men know no reason why the peace between themselves and the Ojibwas
should not last forever.”

“Ojibwa!” Ohrante made a gesture of contempt. “The Ojibwa may be a slave
of the white men if he wishes. I, Ohrante,”—he drew himself up a little
straighter, keeping his fierce eyes on the boy’s face to observe what
effect the name had—“I, Ohrante, am no Ojibwa. I was born a Mohawk of the
great six nations. Now I and my braves have taken another name, a name
not for the white man’s ears or lips, the name of the ancient race of
warriors and giants who once lived on Minong, the blood of whose chiefs
flows in my body. We will draw others to us, build up a strong nation,
and drive the white men from all the lands about the great waters.” He
made a sweeping gesture with one long, big-muscled arm.

Hugh could scarcely believe his ears. The giant Indian must be insane to
be the victim of such an illusion of greatness. Hugh knew nothing of any
ancient race upon Minong, although Baptiste had told him that the
Indians, in days gone by, were supposed to have come to the island from
time to time for copper. For all he knew, Ohrante might be a direct
descendant of those old miners, but his speech was none the less absurd.
Its vanity and pomposity were in such violent contrast to the weak, nasal
voice in which it was uttered that the boy forgot his own peril in his
desire to laugh. He controlled himself and for a few moments made no
answer. Ohrante also remained silent. As the two gazed into one another’s
eyes, a daring idea entered the lad’s head. Ohrante’s talk of the ancient
race of warriors and giants recalled the tales told by Baptiste and
Blaise and the trick he and his brother had already played upon the big
Mohawk.

“You speak,” Hugh said, “of the ancient race who once lived on this
island. I have heard that the inhabitants of Minong were not human at
all, but were, and indeed still are, spirits and fiends and frightful
creatures unlike man or beast. Once I laughed at those tales, but now
that I am on Minong, I laugh no more. I myself have seen and heard
strange things on this island. If I were not a good Christian, I should
be sore afraid of this enchanted land. Have you seen or heard aught of
those strange beings, great chief?”

Hugh’s eyes were fastened on Ohrante. When he mentioned the spirits and
fiends he noticed a slight change in the huge man’s face. As the boy went
on, Ohrante’s composure was so far shaken that he drew a quick breath and
one of his big hands clenched with a convulsive movement. Hugh was
pleased with his strategy. He had found the giant’s weak spot. Brave he
might be in contact with his fellow men, but of unearthly beings he was
superstitiously afraid. Hugh feigned not to notice, and in a moment
Ohrante had covered his agitation with a show of indifference.

“No, white man,” he lied proudly, “I have heard nothing and I fear
nothing.” Then he changed the subject. “When the waves go down in the
lake out there, we leave Minong. We go to the place of vengeance, where
Ohrante puts all his prisoners to death. On the Island of Torture both
white men and Ojibwas may find the signs and learn how the Chief of
Minong takes vengeance on his enemies. Prepare for the torture, white
man, for not even your white God can save you.” And turning, the big
chief strode away.

“Yet I think He will save me,” Hugh said to himself, “through my brother
Blaise.”

It was after sundown when the other canoe returned, with the four
remaining members of the band. They brought with them a quantity of moose
meat, the best parts of a young animal. Immediately the kettle was swung
over the fire. The odor of the cooking meat was tempting to Hugh’s
nostrils, but he was not offered any. His captors evidently considered
that he had had sufficient food for that day. The whole band feasted on
moose, and the camp did not become quiet until much later than on the
previous night.

Hugh was left tied to the tree, his wrists and ankles bound. No one took
enough pity on him to throw a blanket over him. This time it was the
squat man who lay down by the fire. He must have been very sure the
prisoner could not get away. Moreover the enormous amount of meat he had
eaten made the man especially drowsy. His loud breathing soon proved that
he was sleeping soundly.

Under the birch tree, beyond the light of the flickering fire, Hugh lay,
tense and anxious. He heard the snores of his guard, and other sounds of
heavy slumbering from the larger wigwam. Why did not Blaise come? Except
the breathing of the sleeping Indians and the low ripple of the water on
the beach, not a sound broke the silence of the night. Every sense on the
alert, Hugh waited through the long minutes. It seemed to him hours must
have passed since the guard lay down by the fire.

What was that rustle in the willows? It was the slightest of sounds, but
his ear caught it. Was it only a rabbit? He felt a touch on the rope that
bound him to the tree, then a sharp jerk. The rope sagged down. Fingers
grasped his shoulder and sent a shiver of excitement through his body. A
hand slipped swiftly down his left arm, something cold touched his
wrists, slipped between them. There was another little jerk, and his arms
were free. His numb hands dropped to the ground, began to tingle. He did
not dare to try to raise himself to a sitting position for fear of making
a noise. Then his ankles fell apart, and he knew that bond had been cut
also. Yet, motionless, he waited for orders.

The hand touched his shoulder again. Lips brushed his ear, as a voice
whispered in the softest of hisses, “Roll over and follow.”

Hugh obeyed unquestioningly. As he rolled over, he realized that the cord
was still attached to his left wrist. There came a gentle pull, and he
understood. Blaise had hold of the cord. This was his method of guiding
his brother. Hugh attempted to crawl forward, but his legs and feet were
so numb he found progress difficult. They dragged like logs. He could not
move them lightly and noiselessly, yet he must go noiselessly to escape.

The cord on his wrist slackened. Blaise had sensed the difficulty. His
shoulder brushed Hugh as he crawled back to the latter’s side. In a
moment he was silently but vigorously rubbing and kneading Hugh’s calves,
ankles and feet. Hot prickles of feeling began to course through the numb
legs. After a few moments of stinging pain, the blood was running
normally again, and the numbness was gone. Still the wigwams remained
silent and the squat Indian by the fire snored on. An Indian in his wild
state is commonly supposed to sleep lightly and wake at the slightest
sound, and so he does if he is where there may be danger, and has not
eaten or drunk too much. The Indian is human, however. A full and hearty
meal, accompanied by a sense of security, can cause him to sleep as
soundly as any well fed white man.




                                  XXVI
                                 ESCAPE


Taking the lead again, Blaise crawled cautiously and silently away from
the vicinity of the fire and the wigwams. Hugh, his legs and feet once
more under control, followed close behind, Blaise still guiding him by
the cord attached to his wrist. The half-breed boy seemed able to glide
like a snake without a sound, but Hugh was less experienced in stealth.
In spite of all his care, the bushes he brushed rustled now and then. The
noises were very slight, but each rustle or creak brought the lad’s heart
into his mouth. Yet the Indian by the fire lay still, and no sound came
from the wigwams.

At last the fugitives were far enough from the camp, and well screened by
trees and bushes, so they dared go upright. Blaise had kept his sense of
direction in the darkness and knew where he wanted to go. Turning to the
right, he led Hugh across level ground and through open growth of birches
and poplars. Then he turned again. A little farther on he paused among
some alders, handed Hugh the cord, uttered a low whisper of caution, and
slipped between the bushes.

Hugh carefully pushed his way through, and stopped still. Before him lay
the lake, the ripples lit by the stars and moon. Glancing along the
narrow strip of sand that separated him from the water, he could make out
a dark shape lying above the reach of the waves. It was an overturned
canoe. Blaise had circled about in the woods and had come back to the
shore. A little way beyond the canoe, back from the beach and hidden from
where Hugh stood by trees and bushes, was the Indian camp. This was a
dangerous manœuvre of his younger brother’s and at first Hugh could see
no reason for it. Why had not Blaise led straight back through the woods
and up the ridge? The bateau, to which they must trust to get clear away,
was on the other side of those ridges. _Was_ the bateau still there or
had the Indians found it?

Blaise was moving swiftly along the beach, and, after hesitating a
moment, Hugh followed. He was relieved to find that the alder bushes
still screened them from the camp. They could launch the canoe without
being visible from the wigwams or from the spot where the fire burned.
The canoe was not one of those he had seen Ohrante’s band using, but a
small craft, barely large enough to hold two men. Silently the boys
turned it over, carried it down the beach and placed it in the lake.
Blaise, standing in the water to his knees, held the boat while Hugh
stepped into the stern. The younger boy took his place in the bow, the
paddles dipped.

Hugh had expected to steer around the inner beach and on up the long bay.
He was astonished when Blaise signalled him to go the other way. This was
indeed a risk. The older boy would have protested, had he dared speak
loud enough to make his brother hear. But they were too near the camp to
chance conversation, whatever foolhardy venture Blaise might be planning.
Moreover Hugh knew that the half-breed lad was far from foolhardy and
must have good reason for what he was doing. The elder brother obeyed the
signal and said nothing.

Crouched as far down in the canoe as they could kneel and still wield
their paddles, the two dipped the blades noiselessly. A few strokes and
they were out of the shelter of the fringe of bushes. They were passing
the camp, where the ground was open from lodges to beach. Fearfully Hugh
glanced in that direction. He could make out the dark bulk of one of the
wigwams and near it the dull glow of the dying fire. His guard lay beside
that fire. If the man should wake and raise his head, he could scarcely
fail to see the passing canoe, a dark, moving shape on the moonlit water.
A vigorous but careful stroke, and both lads held their paddles
motionless while the canoe slipped by of its own momentum. It made no
sound audible above the rippling of the water on the pebbles. The squat
Indian slept on.

A clump of mountain ash, leafy almost to the ground, came between the
canoe and the fire. The paddles dipped again. In a few moments the slight
projection, scarce long enough to be called a point, had been rounded.
The wigwams and the fire were hidden by trees and bushes.

Hugh drew a long breath and put more speed into his strokes. The brothers
were moving down the bay, and he realized now the reason for their
manœuvre. Had they struck through the woods to the ridge, they would
inevitably, in spite of the greatest care and caution, have left a trail.
The canoe left no tracks. When they passed out from the narrowest part of
the channel, they were obliged to put strength and vigor into their
paddling, for they were going almost directly against the fresh wind.
They kept as close to the right hand shore as they dared, and so had some
protection. Vigorous and careful handling were necessary, however, to
make headway in the roughening water.

As they went by one of the shallow curves that could scarcely be called
coves, Blaise uttered a little exclamation and pointed with his paddle to
a black object moving on the water. As Hugh looked, the thing turned a
little, and he could make out, in silhouette, great branching antlers. A
moose was swimming from one shore of the little indentation to the other.

“There is meat to last us a long time,” he muttered regretfully, “if only
we dared risk a shot.”

Blaise laughed softly. “We could not shoot if we wished. Neither has a
gun.”

“True. When you set out to find me, Blaise, why didn’t you bring yours?”

The lad in the bow shrugged slightly. “I could not use it without a
noise, and I wished not to be burdened with it. Let us not talk now.
Voices carry far in the night.”

Hugh heeded the warning. As the bay widened, the force of wind and waves
increased. The lads were paddling northeast, almost in the teeth of the
wind. Hugh began to doubt whether they would be able to round the long
point, or even keep on along it much farther. Blaise had no intention of
rounding the point, however. He had another plan. As they passed the twin
coves, where they had camped while they sought for the cache of furs, he
turned his head ever so slightly and spoke.

“Steer into the crack where we carried out the furs.”

Hugh replied with a word of assent and steered close under the riven rock
wall. The water was slightly sheltered, and the waves were running past
the fissures, not into them. The canoe slipped by the stern of the
wrecked bateau, projecting from the crack into which it had been driven.
The narrow rift was passed. At the wider black gap, Hugh made the turn.
In response to his brother’s quick “Take care,” he held his paddle
steady.

The canoe glided into the gap, slowed down. Before the bottom could grate
on the pebbles, Blaise had warned Hugh to step over the side. The latter
found himself in the water above his knees.

“We must take the canoe well up the crack and hide it,” he said.

“And risk its discovery, which would put Ohrante on our trail? No, lay
your paddle in the bottom. Turn around, but do not let go.”

Hugh did not at first grasp the half-breed lad’s intention, but he
obeyed. When Hugh had turned, Blaise spoke again.

“Push out with all your strength. Now.”

Together they gave the light craft a strong shove and let go. It slid
over the water, out from the mouth of the rift. The wind caught it and it
was borne away in the moonlight.

“The wind will take it up the bay,” the younger boy explained. “It may
stay right side up, it may not. It may be shattered on the rocks or
washed on some beach. Wherever Ohrante finds it, it will be a long way
from here.”

“It will not help him to pick up our trail certainly,” Hugh exclaimed.
“That was a clever thought, Blaise.”

Blaise turned to lead the way up the crack. It was black dark in the
fissure. Patches of moonlit sky could be seen overhead, between the
branches and spreading sprays of the cedars, but no light penetrated to
the bottom. Guiding themselves by their outstretched hands, and feeling
for each step, as they had done on that other night when they had entered
this cleft, the two made their way up. As he thought of that other night,
Hugh put his hand to his breast to feel if the precious packet was still
there, attached to a piece of fish line around his neck. It was luck that
the Indians had merely taken his weapons and had not searched him.

Feeling along the left wall of the gap, Blaise found the slit that led
into the pit where the furs had been concealed, but he did not squeeze
through. He led on up the wider rift. Where the walls were less sheer and
trees grew on the gully bottom, pushing through in the darkness became
increasingly difficult. When the brothers had come that way in daylight,
they had found it troublesome enough. Now exposed roots and undergrowth
snared Hugh’s toes, rocks and tree trunks bruised his shoulders, prickly
evergreen branches scratched his face and caught his clothes. These were
small troubles, however, not to be heeded by a fugitive flying from such
a cruel fate as Ohrante had in mind for him. The boy’s only desire was to
put as great a distance as possible between himself and the giant Mohawk.
Indeed he had to hold himself in restraint to keep from panic flight.

After a few hundred feet of stumbling, groping progress, the two came to
the broken birch, ghostly in the moonlight which shone down into the open
space where the guide tree stood. They paused for a moment. On either
hand and ahead the growth was thick.

“Which way now?” Hugh whispered the words as if he still feared an enemy
lurking near.

“Straight ahead to the top of the high ridge. It will be difficult. I
know not if we can do it in the darkness.”

“We must do it,” said Hugh emphatically.

Blaise nodded. “We will try,” he agreed.

The ground was low here, protected from the lake by the rock ridge with
its rifts and cracks. A few steps beyond the little birch, the lads found
themselves in a veritable tangle of growth, through which but little
light penetrated from the sky. They struggled forward among close
standing, moss-draped, half dead evergreens and old rotten birches, their
feet sinking deep into the soft leaf mould and decayed wood that formed
the soil. Where fallen trees had made an opening that let in a little
light, thickets of bushes and tangles of ground yew had grown up, more
difficult to penetrate than the black woods. Compelled to make their way,
for the most part, by feeling instead of sight, they could go but slowly.
Hugh soon lost all sense of direction, and he wondered whether Blaise
knew where he was going.

Rising ground and a thinning of the woods reassured the white boy. They
must be going up the ridges, not back towards the Indian camp. He
marvelled that Blaise had managed to find the way. Blaise was far from
infallible though, and there soon came a time when he did not think it
wise to go farther. They had climbed a steeper slope, treading firmer
soil and outcroppings of rock, but still in thick woods, and had reached
a small rock opening overgrown with moss and low plants. The sweet
perfume of the carpet of twin flowers he could not see came to Hugh’s
nostrils. Blaise stopped and peered about him. Clouds must have covered
the moon, for the open space was very dark.

“We had best wait here,” he said after a few moments. “If the moon shines
again, or after dawn comes, I will climb a tree and see where we are.”

“Don’t you know where you are?” Hugh asked.

“I am not certain. How can I be certain in the darkness, when I have
never come this way before? I think our way lies over there.” He pointed
across the opening. “We are on the top of a low ridge, but if we go down
where the trees stand thick, we may lose our way and much time also. We
are well hidden here. When Ohrante wakes, he will not know which way to
seek. It will be long before he finds our trail.”

“I hate to stop as long as we can go on.”

“I too, my brother, but I think we shall gain time, not lose it if we
wait for light.”




                                 XXVII
                         WHAT BLAISE OVERHEARD


Far from the Indian camp and well hidden, the brothers could risk
conversation. Instinctively they kept their voices low. Hugh was curious
to learn how Blaise had crossed from the pond in the small island to the
long point, and Blaise equally eager to hear how Hugh had fallen into
Ohrante’s hands. Seated on moss patches in the rock opening, they
satisfied each other’s curiosity on those points. Then Blaise went on to
tell how he had tracked his elder brother. When he had smelled smoke he
had known he must be near a camp.

“I heard the rippling of water,” the boy said in his soft singsong. “Then
I caught the sound of men’s voices. I left the trail and crept towards
the water. I peeped through the alders and saw the lake and the beach.
Canoes lay on the pebbles, but no man was in sight. I wished to find out
if you were in the camp. So I went back into the woods and crawled
towards the voices. I crept from tree to tree and bush to bush, and found
myself behind a wigwam. I lay flat and tried to peep around it, but a
clump of willows was in the way, and I could see nothing. I crawled like
a snake for the willows. I looked through them and saw you, my brother,
bound to the birch. My heart gave a leap when I saw you unharmed and knew
there was yet time to steal you away. I saw Ohrante too. He sat by the
fire and ate. He turned his head, and I feared his sharp eyes might find
me through the willows, so I crept away. I went back into the woods and
hid not far from the trail. The Iroquois I had seen on the trail
returned. Crawling nearer the camp again, I heard him talk to Ohrante,
but I could not understand, for he spoke the Iroquois language. I saw no
way to get you away before nightfall, and I feared they might carry you
off somewhere in a canoe where I could not follow.

“Back to the beach I went and hid myself in the alders near the big
canoes. I saw Ohrante and six others go away. By their moccasins I knew
that two were Iroquois, the others Ojibwas and Crees. A small canoe was
left on the beach. When Ohrante had been gone a while, I heard voices,
and two more men came along the shore from the camp. One carried a net of
cedar cord. He had an ugly face and a red band around his head. The
other, a short, strong man, I knew at once. He is Monga, an Ojibwa, one
of the two who helped Ohrante to escape. The two sat down on the sand
just below where I was hidden, and I crawled nearer to listen to what
they said as they mended their net. They spoke Ojibwa. Red Band has not
been with Ohrante long. He asked what the chief would do with the white
captive. Monga,—his name means the _loon_,—answered that Ohrante would
take the white man to the mainland, to the Isle of Torture, but they
could not start to-day because the wind was too strong and the lake too
rough. Red Band was not pleased. He said he wished the chief would let
the white men alone until his people were stronger. Monga said that
Ohrante hated all white men. When the trader Beaupré escaped his
vengeance——”

“What?” interrupted Hugh. “He said ‘the trader Beaupré’?”

“Yes. When the trader Beaupré escaped Ohrante’s vengeance, the chief
swore to kill every white man who fell into his hands.”

“But what did he mean by father’s escaping Ohrante’s vengeance?”

“It was as we thought,” Blaise replied, his voice low and tense. “It was
Ohrante who brought our father to his death. Red Band said it was true
that Beaupré escaped, but in his escape he received his death wound.”

“That explains what we found at the Devil Track River.”

“Yes. From what they said it seems that our father and Black Thunder both
fell into Ohrante’s hands. In some way they escaped, but they were
overtaken at the River of Devil Tracks. They fought and our father got
away again, but sorely wounded. That is the way I put together the things
I heard the two men say.”

“How comes it then that the bateau and furs are here on Isle Royale? Did
Ohrante bring them here?”

“I think Ohrante knows nothing of the furs. When we first saw him here I
thought he had come to Minong to seek the furs, but no, this is not the
first time he has been here. His braves call him ‘Chief of Minong.’ I
think he fled here, he and Monga and the other man who helped him, when
he escaped from our father and the Ojibwas. I know not when the rest of
the band joined him, but I believe Ohrante and those two were living
somewhere on this island when white men and red sought them and could not
find them. This I know, here on Minong Ohrante captured our father and
Black Thunder. Monga said it was strange that two white men had been
found here, where no man was believed to come. Both Jean Beaupré and the
new white captive pretended to be only traders, he said, and told tales
of how they were driven here by storm and wrecked on the rocks. The chief
believed Beaupré’s story, but now that this other white man came with the
same tale, Ohrante began to doubt. He thought perhaps they came to spy on
him.”

“I feared Ohrante did not believe me,” Hugh confessed, “but it made
little difference what story I told. He says he hates all white men and
intends to destroy them and drive them out of this country. He thinks he
is destined to be some sort of king over this part of the world. Did
those two say more of father?”

“No, their net was finished and they went out in the little canoe. At
once I sought you, my brother, but I dared not cut your bonds. The two
were only a little way out in the bay. Later I listened to them talk
again. I could not get the meaning of all they said, but I think Ohrante
intends to hold a council on that island where he tortures his prisoners.
I am sure that others are to meet him there to join his band.”

“And he was reserving me to be put to death by torture as a sort of
entertainment for his new adherents, I suppose,” Hugh muttered grimly.
“That is not the part in the performance I should choose to play. Perhaps
I can find some other part more to my liking.” A daring suggestion had
come into his mind as Blaise told of the council on the “Island of
Torture.” “Did you learn when the meeting was to be?” Hugh asked
abruptly.

“It is to be soon, I think. They wait only for safe weather to make the
crossing.”

Hugh was silent in frowning thought. When he spoke, it was not of the
council. “It is plain to see what happened,” he said musingly. “The storm
bore father and his comrade here to this island. Their boat was driven
into that crack in the rocks and wrecked. Ohrante came upon them, took
them captive and carried them to the mainland. Father must have had some
warning, though, for he hid the pelts and the packet. I wonder, Blaise,
if, when he was first wrecked, he put the furs up on that rock shelf to
keep them dry and safe. Then, afterwards, when he learned Ohrante was
near, he moved the bales to a more secret spot farther from the wreck.”

Blaise nodded. “It may be,” was all he said.

“We were right all the time,” Hugh added, “in believing that Ohrante had
something to do with father’s death.”

“I felt in my heart that Ohrante was the guilty one,” the younger lad
replied simply.

“Yet of course it may not have been Ohrante himself who gave father his
death blow,” Hugh mused.

Blaise waved away his brother’s reasoning with a gesture. “It matters not
whether Ohrante himself or one of his men struck the blow. It is not the
knife that we punish when a murder is committed, but the man who wields
the knife. Ohrante is that man. It was he who captured our father, who
would have put him to the torture, who caused his death.”

“And Ohrante shall pay for it,” Hugh broke in passionately. “He shall pay
soon if we can but reach the mainland in time. The sky is lighter,
Blaise,” he added, looking up above the surrounding tree tops. “We must
be moving.”




                                 XXVIII
                          CONFUSING THE TRAIL


Looking around for a tall tree, Blaise found a tapering spruce, growing
in a pocket of deeper soil and towering above its fellows. The stubs of
the lower branches, that, deprived of light by adjacent trees, had died
and fallen off, formed a ladder, up which he climbed, Hugh not far
behind. Reaching the live limbs, they pushed their way among the thick
masses of dark green needles. The smaller lad went on until the slender
spire bent threateningly under his weight.

The moon had come out from behind the clouds, and the paling sky foretold
the dawn. From his perch above the surrounding trees, Blaise could see
the water, and, across it, the narrow black line of the low point. On the
other side, directly below him, he could make out from the growth that
the ground dipped down. Beyond the slight dip, the rising ranks of trees
betrayed the steepness of the ascent. A little to his right and far up,
his keen eyes detected a bare stretch of rock between the masses of
foliage above and below. He took a long look in every direction, then
started to climb down.

Hugh, learning from the movement of the branches above him that Blaise
was descending, also moved farther down. There, resting on a stout limb,
he waited for his brother.

“What did you make out?” he asked eagerly. “I could see that we are part
way up the ridges. Have we kept a straight course?”

“Yes, we have come straighter than I feared, but we are scarce more than
half-way up, and we must go farther to the left. You remember that bare
cliff?”

“The wall, like a fortification, that we saw from across the bay?”

“The same. We cannot climb that place. We must go to the left to avoid
it. Come, we must make haste.”

Darkness still lay deep in the woods, as the two plunged down the short
slope into a narrow and shallow gully. Through the thicker growth at the
bottom, they threaded their way to the left a hundred yards or more, then
began to ascend again. The rapidly rising ground, interrupted by shallow
depressions only, served as a guide. Where the slope was regular and not
too steep and there was soil enough to anchor them, trees grew thick, but
abrupt bare places, masses of tumbled rocks and almost vertical walls
made up much of the way. The northwestern side of the long point was far
more abrupt than the southeastern, but the increasing light made it
possible for the boys to choose their path. They were no longer compelled
to proceed by sense of feeling only. Sound of wind, active of limb, and
goaded on by the signs of breaking day, they climbed swiftly and without
pause.

Crossing a narrow shelf of broken rock débris, that had crumbled into
soil deep enough to bear trees, they came to the last rise. By going
farther to the left, they had thought to avoid the bare, pillared, rock
ramparts, and had indeed escaped the steepest and highest stretch.
Nevertheless the cliff before them was almost vertical, and clothed with
only an occasional sturdy, dwarfed mass of cedar or trailing juniper, a
little seedling tree, stunted bush or tiny plant, growing in crevice or
hollow, and the ever present, tight clinging moss and lichens. Had the
ancient rock not been ribbed and blocked and weathered, it would have
been unclimbable. The splitting off of blocks and scaling away of flakes,
which had crumbled into débris at the foot of the cliff, had left shelves
and crannies affording some foothold and finger-hold to the active
climber.

It was a bad place to go up but not an impossible one. The fugitives
paused only long enough to select what appeared to be a possible route up
a sort of flue, caused by the falling out of one of the pillars. Blaise
went first, and Hugh would have followed close behind, had not the
half-breed boy bade him, somewhat sharply, wait below. If Blaise lost his
hold and slipped back, it would not advantage him any to take his elder
brother down with him. The lad was nearing the top when he let his weight
rest too heavily on an insecure ledge. The rock flaked off, and he was
left hanging, one hand thrust into a crack, the other clinging to a cedar
stem. Down below, Hugh held his breath in suspense. For the interval of
an instant, while the agile climber drew up his left foot and thrust his
toes into a cranny, the cedar held. Then its roots pulled loose. But
Blaise managed to keep his balance, and quickly hooked his strong fingers
around the rim of the hole where the cedar clump had been growing. In a
few moments he was over the top, and it was Hugh’s turn to make the
ascent.

The scaling away of the piece of rock that had formed the narrow ledge
made it necessary for Hugh to take a slightly different route up the
flue. He was heavier than Blaise and for him the climb was even more
perilous. Profiting by his younger brother’s experience, Hugh trusted to
crannies and cracks into which he could thrust his fingers and toes,
rather than to the more treacherous projections. Climbing cautiously, he
reached the summit without accident.

The growth on the ridge top prevented the boys from seeing to the east,
but the sky was now so light they knew sunrise could not be far away.
Hurrying across the summit, they came out upon the southeastern slope.
From there they could see the rose pink flush of day.

The southeastern side of the high ridge was far less abrupt than the
northwestern. Except for occasional open rock stretches, it was, however,
thickly forested. In spite of the rough going, the fugitives made good
speed on the down grade. Nimbly the light-footed Blaise threaded his way
among trees and undergrowth, and sprang down the open slopes. Hugh, to
whose feet the very thought of the cruel Iroquois seemed to give wings,
kept close behind. In a shorter time than they would have believed
possible, they were at the edge of the water.

Blaise glanced towards the woods across the channel. “That is not the
island where the little lake is,” he said. “We are too far down. The
bateau is over that way.” Without waiting for Hugh to reply, the lad
turned to the right and began to make his way along shore.

A moment later, Hugh, following closely, said anxiously, “We are leaving
a plain trail here. The ground is damp and there is much undergrowth.”

“We cannot help that. If we must leave a trail, we will use it to lead
our enemies astray, Step as lightly as you can, and in a little while I
will show you a trick.” Hugh had been possessed with the fear that some
of Ohrante’s men might have discovered the boat and taken it away. He was
greatly relieved to find it tied to the overhanging tree where he had
left it.

“Take the bateau,” the younger boy ordered, “and paddle down to the place
where we came out of the woods. I will join you there.”

“What are you going to do?”

“Lead our enemies astray. If they find my tracks near their camp and
follow them, they may also find the trail down to this place. They must
not think that we crossed the water from here. I shall make tracks, plain
tracks, from here down towards the mouth of the bay, beyond the place
where you and I came out of the woods a little while ago.”

“But in our old trail from here to the ridge top the footprints point up,
not down.”

“Yes, and we have not time to go back and make new. I hope they will
think we travelled both ways on that trail. I will go back a little way
and make a few prints leading down.”

While Hugh was untying and pushing off the bateau, Blaise, going
carefully and lightly, followed for a little way the route he had taken
when he went in search of his white brother. Then, turning, he came back,
leaving here and there clear impressions to show direction. Twenty or
thirty feet from the shore, he branched off to the left, making tracks
leading to the alongshore trail, but avoiding the spot where the bateau
lay. He then went on towards the mouth of the bay, carefully obliterating
all toe marks that pointed up the channel, and making sure to leave some
pointing down.

In the meantime Hugh had pushed off the bateau. He noticed that the boat
had left no clear traces, except where the rope had rubbed the bark from
the limb around which it had been tied. That scar might easily have been
made by the claws of some animal climbing out over the water. To make
such an origin seem more likely, he scratched the scar lengthwise several
times with his thumb nail. As he paddled along close to shore, he came
upon the tree Blaise had crossed on, and pushed it out into mid channel.

About a hundred feet below the place where they had come out of the
woods, Hugh joined Blaise. Here they took pains to leave distinct signs
that a boat had been pulled up on shore. They wished their pursuers to
see that they had taken to the water at this spot. Their intention was to
lead Ohrante, should he find their trail, away from the island where the
furs were hidden.

“Wouldn’t it be possible, Blaise,” Hugh questioned, “to load the furs and
start across the lake at once? If the wind is right, I am willing to risk
Ohrante’s seeing us and giving chase. With a good breeze we can
outdistance his canoes.”

Blaise shook his head. “We could not run away from him in this wind. Last
night it was nearly northeast, but now it is northwest. Surely you
noticed that when we were on the ridge top. We cannot make speed with
this heavy bateau against the wind. Yet it is not too strong for canoes
to go against it, if the men at the paddles have skill. No, we must wait
till the wind changes or till darkness comes again. Now we will carry our
false trail farther.”

Blaise steered the boat straight across the channel to the outer end of
the opposite island. Between steep, high, bare masses of detached rock
and the small island itself, a reef extended, the inner end rising out of
the water to form a beach of boulders and pebbles. The boys ran the
bateau on the pebbles and jumped out. They could see off across the open
water to the east, where the sun was already above the horizon.

“Here,” said Blaise, “we will leave the ashes of a fire, as if we had
stopped to cook a meal. Make haste and get wood.”

Hugh did not need to be warned to make haste. A small fire was soon
kindled on the pebbles where it could not spread, then partly stamped out
and left smouldering. As the boys embarked again, Hugh glanced back to
satisfy himself that the wind was not carrying any sparks towards the
woods. Heretofore he had always drenched his cooking fire before leaving
camp, but to have poured water on this one would have defeated his
younger brother’s purpose. Blaise wanted the recent kindling of the fire
to be in plain evidence.

“Where we have gone from here our enemies cannot tell,” he explained.
“They will find no tracks or signs on this little island except around
the fire. Then they will be sure we have gone by boat, but which way they
will not know.”

“Which way shall we go?” Hugh questioned.

“Back to our camp in the little inland lake, but not down the channel
next the point. We will steer around these big rocks and up the other
side of this island.”

The two paddled the bateau around the rocks and up along the southeastern
side of the small island. High in the center and heavily wooded, it hid
them completely. Their route led them into the open end of the narrow
strait that cut into the other island where the furs were hidden. They
passed the gap with its two tiny islets, where heretofore they had gone
in and out, and were soon back in the little pond.

“I don’t know whether we are wise to stay here,” Hugh said thoughtfully,
as they drew the boat up on the narrow beach. “We have tried to confuse
our trail, yet if Ohrante tracks us across the high ridge and down to the
water, he will surely search all these islands. This is almost too
perfect a hiding place. If those Indians are familiar with this ‘Bay of
Spirits’ they will think of this place at once. Then we shall be caught
like rats in a trap.”

“You are right to call this the ‘Bay of Spirits,’” Blaise replied. “By
that name Monga and Red Band spoke of it. But I think they have never
been here but that one time. From what they said I think they have always
made their camps on the part of Minong that lies the other side of the
high ridge. And now both Monga and Red Band have great fear of this bay.”

Hugh chuckled. “So has the mighty chief Ohrante. I saw his fear in his
face when I spoke of hearing strange noises. I am wondering, though, if
he should track us here, if he will not suspect a trick.”

“Something more than the voices has frightened them,” Blaise went on.
“The second time I listened to those two, Monga told Red Band of huge
giants at the end of the point.”

“Giants? Did he mean those pillars of rock?”

“No, the giants were alive and moved.”

“Some old superstition, Blaise.”

“Monga said he saw the giants, Hugh, he and others of the band.”

“We spent nearly a day on that point and we saw no giants. If Monga saw
anything there it must have been you and me. I don’t understand how those
fellows in that canoe could have missed seeing us. Blaise,”—a sudden
light of understanding dawned in Hugh’s face,—“Blaise, do you remember
how hot and still it was, and how the haze shimmered on the water? And do
you recall the day we crossed to the Isle Royale, the very same sort of
day? We saw the mirage, high mountains towering up where later we found
there were no real mountains. Do you remember too when we left the Bay of
the Beaver, how we saw coming towards us through the morning mist, what
we thought was a ship, so tall it looked, but when it drew nearer it
shrank to a mere sailboat?”

“I remember those things.” Blaise was staring at Hugh’s excited face.

“Don’t you understand then? Don’t you see how it was that Monga and those
others in that canoe saw giants on the end of the point? On that hot,
still day, as they came across the water and looked through the shimmer
of the heat haze, they saw us there on the open rocks. We ourselves saw
that island far out greater than it really was and distorted. Do you
remember how it shrank afterwards? To those men in that canoe we too were
distorted and loomed up huge and tall like giants. That was what
frightened them. That explains their hasty flight. We were the giants on
the end of the point!”

Blaise was still staring, but his look of puzzlement had given way to one
almost of awe. “It may be as you say,” he replied slowly. “Monga thought
it was Kepoochikan and Nanibozho. I cannot understand it at all, that
enchantment you call mirage that makes men see mountains that are not
there and turns bateaus into ships and men into giants.”

“I don’t understand it either,” Hugh admitted, “and neither did the
captain of the _Athabasca_. He said it was just one of the secrets of
nature that we don’t understand yet. Surely the mirage is nothing to
fear. It has stood us in good stead by frightening away Ohrante’s men and
causing them to stand in terror of this bay. No wonder we scared them
away with the echoes. They must have been frightened when they came in
here. If only their fear is strong enough to keep them away now, we are
safe. But we dare not trust too much to that. We must hide ourselves as
well as we can. The entrance to this little lake is narrow and I think I
see a way to block it so it will look as if no boat could have gone
through. First, though, let us eat something if there is anything left.”

“There is a little corn, if no animal has stolen it,” Blaise replied. “I
too am sore hungry, for I have eaten nothing but a few green bearberries
since I set out in search of you.”




                                  XXIX
                           THE CEDAR BARRIER


The corn, in its bark wrapping, was found untouched, hanging from the
birch where Blaise had left it. Not daring to kindle a fire for fear the
smoke might betray them, Hugh put the dry, hulled kernels in the kettle
with cold water to soften them. Then he spoke again of his plan to block
the entrance to the pond.

“That cedar that leans far down over the water,” he explained, “looks as
if it was almost ready to fall of its own weight. If we could pull or
push it down, it would go clear across that narrow channel.”

“But then we could not take our bateau through.”

“Oh, we can easily chop out a section when we are ready to go.”

“If anyone is near he will hear the sound of the axe.”

“It is better to risk that, Blaise, than to leave the entrance open. We
will go look at the tree and see what we can do.”

The leaning, top-heavy cedar had tipped so far that several of its roots
had pulled loose from their anchorage, bringing with them a section of
the shallow soil and exposing the rock below. On one side the roots still
held, supplying enough nourishment to the limbs to keep part of them
alive. Some of the thick sprays of foliage were brown and dead, but many
were still green and flourishing. The tree certainly looked as if the
slightest additional strain would tip it the rest of the way. Before
testing it, the boys noted where it would fall. It stood a few feet above
the water and slanted out at an angle across the passageway.

“It will not catch in any tree when it goes down,” Hugh observed. “Fresh
breaks in other trees or bushes would betray how recently it had fallen.
Of course the fact that it is partly green will prove it hasn’t been down
very long.”

“An uprooted tree lying in the water will stay green for many days,”
Blaise replied.

“I think we had better try to push it over,” Hugh decided. “To make a way
out to-night we shall not need to chop through the trunk. This end will
be high enough from the water so, by cutting off a few of the lower
limbs, we can take the boat underneath.”

“If the water is deep enough at this side,” added Blaise.

First attempts to bring down the slanting tree failed, however. It was
not so insecure as it appeared. The tough roots that still held were
stronger anchors than the boys had suspected. Pushing and pulling with
all their might had little effect.

“We must cut away some of the roots that are holding,” Hugh said at last.
“Lend me your hatchet, Blaise. Ohrante has mine.”

The roots were tough, but the little axe was sharp and Hugh’s blows
vigorous. He cut every root he could reach, and the tree trembled, swayed
and tipped, pulling up more rootlets and chunks of soil.

“It will come now. It needs just a little more weight. Here, Blaise.”

Hugh returned the hatchet, jumped upon the leaning trunk and made his way
along it. The tree swayed with the added weight. As he went farther up
and out, the strain on the few roots was too great. With a rending sound
they tore up the shallow soil, and the cedar crashed down across the
channel.

Hugh had expected the tree to go suddenly, and he kept a firm hold, but
he was jarred and drenched in the splash. The trunk, where he was
clinging, did not go under water, and he scrambled quickly back to shore.
All the roots were in the air now, and the tree slanted down from the
butt, instead of up. The crown rested in the shallow water and against
the opposite shore. The entrance to the little pond was both well closed
and effectually concealed.

Hugh uttered a little exclamation of satisfaction. “It must look from out
there,” he said, nodding towards the water beyond, “like a perfectly
natural accident. This old cedar is the best of screens. I don’t believe
anyone coming around that little island and seeing this fallen tree would
guess there was a lake or bay in here. Of course if he came so close he
could peep through the branches, he might be able to see water beyond,
but he would never guess that a boat could go in. If anyone came up here,
though, he would see the freshly upturned earth and the cut ends of the
tree roots. But the bushes hide this spot from the water and there is
nothing to bring anyone ashore here. We shall be better hidden than we
could have hoped.”

“Yes, it was a good thought, my brother. We will go back now and bring
the bateau around to this side of the little lake. Then if anyone looks
through the branches and sees the water beyond, he cannot see the bateau
or us. If he tries to cut a way through, we shall hear him and be warned.
The sun climbs high. We must make haste.”

Without pausing to reply, Hugh led off at once, back to the beach and
around to the spot where the boat lay. Quickly and carefully, the
brothers erased all signs of their camp that might be seen from across
the pond. Hugh gathered up the remains of the fire and was about to throw
them into the water, when Blaise stopped him. The charred sticks might
float across, and betray that someone had camped there. So Hugh carried
the blackened bits back into the woods, and then washed every trace of
ashes from the pebbles and sand. The mast and sail, which had been left
on shore, were laid in the boat, and the lads paddled around to a spot
less than a hundred feet from the end of the blockaded passageway. With
the poplar rollers they had used before, they drew the bateau up on
shore, where it could not be seen by anyone peeping through the barrier.

The sun would soon be directly overhead. Ohrante had had several hours to
find Hugh’s trail. The boy did not believe that the Iroquois would let
him escape without some effort to trace and recapture him. Even now the
Chief of Minong or some of his followers might be near at hand. It would
be wise to lie low and keep very quiet, restricting conversation to
necessary whispers. After chewing, as well as he could, some of the
partly softened corn, Hugh stretched himself out on the narrow beach to
let the sun dry his clothes.

Waiting quietly for Ohrante to come and find him proved nerve wracking.
After what seemed a long period of inaction, he raised himself on his
elbow and hitched nearer his younger brother. The latter was sitting
close to the bateau, his eyes closed, apparently asleep.

“Blaise, I’m going up through the woods to find some spot where I can see
out. Then if anyone comes near our barrier I shall know it.”

The half-breed boy had opened his eyes at the first word. “We must take
great care,” he replied in the softest of whispers. “The cracking of a
twig, the moving of a bush may betray us. Yet I am ready to take the risk
if you are.”

“We’ll both go then, and we’ll not take more risk than we can help.”

Blaise nodded and rose. Slipping into the woods just beyond where the
boat lay, he threaded his way among trees and bushes. Hugh followed quite
as cautiously. It was but a short distance, and after a few steps Blaise
dropped to his hands and knees. Hugh followed his example, and remained
motionless while the other crept ahead and disappeared behind a clump of
balsams.

The older boy waited several minutes, then ventured forward. Beyond the
balsams he paused, but could catch no glimpse of Blaise among the dense
growth. The sunlight between the trees ahead showed him that he must be
close to the margin of the woods. Lying almost flat, he wriggled along
until he could see a patch of water. For a moment he lay still, looking
and listening. Then he crept forward again and took his station behind a
thick mass of cedar needles. In its youth this cedar had been bent almost
double by some weight, a fallen tree probably, and had grown in that
misshapen form, branching and leafing out in dense sprays clear to the
ground. Peeping around the green screen, Hugh found he was but a few feet
from the edge of the water. The sheltered bay was without a ripple, the
sun hot, the woods still, the silence unbroken by even the twitter of a
bird or the hum of an insect.

The boy was about to raise himself for a better view, when, from the
water, a sound came to his ears. The very slightest of sounds it was, but
he lowered his head instantly. He wriggled a little farther back behind
the cedar masses and lay motionless. The sound came again, the slightest
suggestion of rippling water. But the bay was smooth and still. What he
heard was the dipping of a paddle blade, the ripple of water against the
side of a boat.

For a few moments Hugh dared not try to look. Then curiosity got the
better of fear. Raising his head ever so little, he found a peep-hole
between the cedar sprays and put his eye to it. He could see a bit of the
round, wooded islet, a section of the shore opposite and, on the water
between, a birch canoe. It held three men. The bow-man was the tall young
Iroquois who had first taken Hugh prisoner. The man in the middle wore a
red band about his long black hair. As the canoe came nearer, Hugh could
see that the steersman was the squat Ojibwa from whose custody he had
escaped. Ohrante had not killed the guard then, but no doubt some heavy
punishment hung over Monga’s head if he did not find Hugh and bring him
back. He was desperate enough to dare return to the dreaded Bay of
Manitos.

The canoe came slowly, the man in the bow watching the water. It was
shallow between the round islet and the blocked entrance to the little
pond. Would the fallen cedar deceive the Indians or not? Hugh held his
breath.

The bow-man straightened a little, glanced towards the cedar, then looked
back at the water again. Red Band’s eyes were on his paddle. Monga’s head
turned from side to side, as he scanned the shore and the woods for any
sign that the fugitive had been there. His glance swept the barrier. He
twisted his paddle. The canoe swerved nearer to the blocked passage.

The man in the bow uttered a sharp hiss of warning. For an instant Hugh
feared that the fellow had caught sight of him through the leafy screen.
But the warning was of shallows ahead. The steersman dipped his paddle
and swerved the canoe again, this time away from the fallen cedar. He did
not cast another glance in that direction, as the canoe came on past the
barrier. The “tide,” as Hugh had called it, was out. The water was at its
lowest point of fluctuation. No one could suspect a navigable channel
where the uprooted tree lay.

It was plain that the Indians intended to round the little islet. To do
so they must pass close to the shore where Hugh was. He lowered his head
cautiously and lay prone and motionless. He could hear the gentle ripple
of the water as the canoe slipped through it. Then a harsh voice spoke.
So close it seemed that the lad almost jumped, and a shudder of fear
passed through him. In an instant he realized that the voice was Monga’s
and that it came from the water, not from the land. The tall fellow
answered briefly, and Monga grunted an abrupt rejoinder. What they said
Hugh could not guess, for they spoke in Ojibwa.

The slight sounds of dipping paddles and rippling water grew fainter and
fainter, then ceased. Hugh drew a long breath, raised his head a little
and looked through the peep-hole. The canoe was no longer in sight. It
could not be far away, though, so he lay still. He was just wondering
whether it would be safe now to try for another and wider view of the bay
and strait, and had raised his head to reconnoiter, when he caught sight
of a crouching figure slipping swiftly between the trees towards him. For
an instant his heart seemed to stop beating, then he saw that it was
Blaise approaching.

The younger brother dropped down beside the elder. “They are gone,” he
whispered. “Let us go back.”




                                  XXX
                         THE FLIGHT FROM MINONG


The canoe had gone by, but the boys did not abate their caution and
watchfulness one whit, as they made their way back to the shore of the
pond.

“That danger seems to be over,” Hugh remarked, his voice still lowered to
a whisper, as he came out of the woods near the boat. “Blaise, could you
understand what those two said? Were you near enough to hear?”

“I was but a little way beyond you, my brother. I heard every word. There
is bad blood between Monga and the young Iroquois. It was the Iroquois
who wished to come up this way. They found the ashes of our fire at the
end of that island out there. Monga thinks we went on across the mouth of
this long bay. He wished to seek us in that direction, but when the
Iroquois found the passage between these islands, he forced Monga to come
up here first. He is sure now that we are not in here. So they go the way
Monga wishes.”

“Then we are safe from those three for some hours at least, but I wish we
knew where Ohrante and the others are.”

“Ohrante must hold Monga, and perhaps the Iroquois, to blame for your
escape. If they take you not back, it will go hard with them. It may be
that Ohrante has sent them to seek you and himself waits at the camp, or
he may search in the other direction. Perhaps he will not come into this
Bay of Manitos at all.”

“Very likely he is glad of an excuse to stay out,” returned Hugh with a
grin. “Ohrante may be brave as a lion with other men, but I think he is
not quite so bold with spirits.”

“No man is,” Blaise replied simply. “I am not sure that Ohrante is very
brave. He is cruel and treacherous, but brave in the way our father was?
No, I think he is not brave like that.” The lad gave one of his
characteristic French shrugs.

Hugh made no answer. He discounted his brother’s opinion of Ohrante
somewhat. Blaise was half Ojibwa, of the Algonquin stock, and the ancient
hatred between Algonquin and Iroquois had not died out and probably never
would die. The boy was naturally unwilling to admit any good qualities in
the self-styled “Chief of Minong,” half Mohawk by blood and wholly so by
training. But Ohrante, thought Hugh, must have some unusual qualities,
since, in spite of the ancient hate, he had attracted to his band Ojibwas
as well as Iroquois.

“Yet, we know not,” Blaise went on after a moment, “how near the others
may be, or how soon Monga may return this way. We dare not venture out
until darkness comes.”

Sunset came at last and twilight. The last morsels of the maple sugar and
the soaked corn made up the evening meal. Blaise slipped through the
woods once more, and reported the outer bay and strait empty of all life
except a pair of fish ducks. Then he and Hugh pushed off the bateau and
crossed the pond. No more peaceful spot could be imagined. The still
water reflected the motionless trees and the soft colors of the sky. From
the woods came the clear, plaintive notes of a thrush.

Landing, the lads went directly to the old birch, and were relieved to
find no signs that anyone had been near it. Blaise climbed the tree and
let himself down into the hole. Hugh then followed him up, received the
bales the younger boy handed him and lowered them to the ground.
Squirrels or wood-mice had nibbled the outer wrappings, but had not
penetrated to the pelts. When all the packages were out of the tree, the
two carried them to the shore and stowed them in the boat. Once more they
paddled across the lake and took the sail aboard. They did not set up the
mast, as they wished to push the boat under the fallen cedar. Beaching
the bateau close to the end of the barrier, they set to work to cut a way
through.

They had only the one little axe, and Hugh wielded that, climbing out on
the tree to reach the limbs he wished to cut. Blaise, standing in the
shallow water, trimmed off smaller branches with his stout knife. Working
with skill and speed, they soon had the lower limbs cleared away from the
under side of the trunk. There appeared to be room enough to push the
bateau through, but the water at that spot was very shallow. The boat
grounded on the rock bottom. The lads unloaded most of the furs, and
succeeded in dragging the lightened bateau over the shallows. Then they
had to carry the bales through the woods, and reload. All this work they
were forced to do as quietly as possible. The blows of the axe could not
be muffled, but the two made no noise they could avoid. They did not dare
light a torch, but the sky was clear and the northern twilight long.
Darkness had settled down, however, by the time they were ready to leave
their island of refuge.

In that sheltered place, they were unable to tell whether there was
breeze enough to aid or hinder them, but they had made up their minds to
leave the Bay of Spirits. If possible they would start for the mainland,
by sail if they could, by paddle if they must. If the wind was so strong
against them that they could not cross, they would go on in the other
direction, and find some temporary hiding place farther from the camp of
the Chief of Minong.

Straight out through the quiet water of the narrower channel, shadowed by
the black, wooded masses of the islands to right and left, they paddled.
Darkness and still water made the shallows treacherous, but they had
noted the channel on their way in that morning, and made their way out
again without accident.

Suddenly Blaise in the bow gave a quick, low hiss. Hugh knew that the
alarmed warning meant, not mere shallow water ahead, but some graver
danger. He obeyed the signal and steered into the deep shadow of the
island close by. The boat scraped the rocks and came to a stop. Looking
out from the protecting gloom, across the moonlit lake, Hugh caught sight
of the cause of his brother’s alarm. A canoe, paddled swiftly, was
crossing the open water beyond the islands, going north. Would it turn up
the bay? Hugh sat motionless, his paddle handle gripped tightly. Then he
drew a breath of relief. The canoe had not turned. It went straight on
and disappeared from sight.

Hugh moved forward to speak to Blaise. “The fellows who were after us,”
he whispered, “going back to camp. They have given up the chase.”

“I could make out but two men,” Blaise replied.

“You couldn’t be certain there weren’t three,” Hugh argued, “unless you
can see much better at night than I can.”

Blaise shook his head doubtfully. “The canoe was headed for the long
point. They must be some of Ohrante’s men.”

“None of them was big enough to be Ohrante himself. We could see them
well enough to make sure of that.”

The brothers waited in the shadow for several minutes, then ventured on.
As they came out from the shelter of the islands, a light southeast
breeze, that barely rippled the water, struck them.

“A favorable enough wind, if we want to go direct to the Kaministikwia,”
remarked Hugh, “but do we?”

“It is at the Kaministikwia where we must sell the furs.”

“But how about our revenge on Ohrante? Are we to let him meet those
reinforcements at his Torture Island, and then go on capturing innocent
people and putting them to death for his own pleasure? Ohrante is a
menace to both white men and Ojibwas, Blaise.”

“Yes, I know that,” the younger lad replied slowly, “but what can you and
I alone do against him and his band and the new braves who come to join
him? I am as eager as you to see Ohrante destroyed. I long to avenge my
father by doing the deed with my own hands, but we must plan cautiously.
If we are over rash, we shall fail.”

“What would you do then, Blaise?”

“I would go quickly to the Kaministikwia, leave the furs there, and find
other men to go with us to the Isle of Torture.”

“That will take a long time,” Hugh objected. “We may be too late.”

“Then we will cross to Minong again. We know where his camp is. Oh, we
can find men eager to seek out Ohrante and his wolf pack wherever they
may be, and destroy them like the wolves they are. The X Y agent will
help us to raise a party. Ohrante was brought into this country by the
Old Company. He is a skillful hunter and took to them many pelts.”

“True. The New Company will be glad to help capture the fellow no doubt,”
Hugh agreed.

“But you and I, as our father’s sons, will claim the right to deal with
him.” There was a hard, fierce note in the lad’s voice. Jean Beaupré had
not been a mild man, yet it was not so much the hot-tempered French
father that spoke now in the son, as the fierce, implacable savage.
Bitterly as Hugh hated the giant Mohawk, he sensed something different
and alien in his half-brother’s passion. Through the weeks of constant
association with Blaise, Hugh had ceased ordinarily to think of him as
Indian, but now, for the moment, he was not Blaise Beaupré, but
Attekonse, Ojibwa. Yet it was the white boy who was the most impatient at
the thought of delay in dealing with Ohrante.

The wind, however, had apparently settled the question. The breeze would
carry the boat northwest to Thunder Bay, but would be more hindrance than
help in going southwest to Grand Portage. In the lee of an island, the
brothers raised their mast and ran up their sail. As they paddled out
from shelter, the breeze caught the canvas and they were off across the
lake.

Clouds had covered the moon, and it was too dark to sight Thunder Cape.
The boys could do nothing but run before the wind and trust to it to
carry them somewhere near their destination. At any rate they were
leaving Minong and putting the miles between themselves and the cruel,
self-appointed chief of the island. That wonderful and beautiful island,
which the white men had appropriately called Royale, deserved a better
king, and the first step in the right direction was to depose the present
usurper, thought Hugh with grim humor.




                                  XXXI
                          WITH WIND AND WAVES


In the light breeze the bateau sailed but slowly, and the boys, in their
impatience, strove to increase speed by helping with the paddles. As they
went farther out, however, the wind increased, and before long they laid
aside the blades, satisfied that they were making fairly good progress.

Overhead the stars shone dimly. To the south and east, the sky was banked
with masses of cloud. Hugh, glancing that way, felt uneasy. A rain-storm
coming down upon the heavily loaded, open bateau would be unpleasant if
not disastrous. From the behavior of the sail, he knew that the wind was
less steady. During the past two months he had learned something of the
moods of Lake Superior, and he understood that he must be ready for a
sudden shift. He had been handling both sheet and tiller, but now he
turned the steering over to his brother.

The change of wind came suddenly and with force. For a few moments Hugh
had his hands full. Blaise obeyed orders on the instant, sail and boat
were swung about, and were soon running freely before the wind again.

“We may not reach the Kaministikwia so soon as we hoped,” Hugh commented,
when the momentary danger was past. “The wind seems to be taking us where
it chooses. As near as I can tell we must be running almost directly west
now instead of northwest.”

Blaise looked up at the only patch of clear sky visible. “Yes, I think we
go west. If the wind holds steady we shall reach the shore somewhere
between the Kaministikwia and the Grand Portage. If it shifts again——” He
broke off with a shrug.

“If it shifts again,” Hugh took up the words, “we shall reach somewhere
sometime, unless we go to the bottom. Even that would be a better fate
than falling into Ohrante’s hands.”

The breeze was increasing in force, the waves running ever higher. Hugh
and Blaise were kept busy and alert. Before the wind, the bateau was
sailing swiftly enough so that there was little danger of following seas
actually swamping it, but, heavily laden, it rode low, with little
buoyancy. Every time it pitched down into the trough of the waves it
shipped water. Those were the dangerous moments. With the utmost care in
handling sail and rudder, the brothers could do little to insure against
disaster. To keep straight before the wind, not to lose control of sail
or rudder, and to take the chances with coolness and composure was about
all there was to do. As they drove on in the darkness, now riding high on
the summit of a wave, now pitching down between walls of water, they lost
all count of time.

The waves seemed to be flattening out a little. Surely they were less
high and long, yet they were even more troublesome, for they had grown
choppy and uneven. When Blaise steered straight with them, Hugh found the
sail swinging around. When he sailed directly before the wind, the boat
pitched at an angle with the waves.

“The wind has shifted again,” he said anxiously.

“It comes from the northeast now,” Blaise returned.

Both were too busy and anxious to talk. Hugh confined his speech to
sharply given orders and Blaise to answering grunts. The spray of
breaking waves soaked them both, time and again. The boat was shipping a
good deal of water, but bailing was impossible. The elder brother had his
hands full with the sail, the younger was compelled to give all his
attention to steering.

Gradually conditions improved. The wind steadied and the waves obeyed it.
Once more the bateau could ride them straight, while running directly
before the breeze. The clouds were broken now, moving swiftly across the
sky, covering and uncovering the moon and stars. Whenever the boys dared
to take their eyes from sail and water, they glanced upward. When enough
sky had been blown clean to show them the position of the moon and
principal stars, both lads were surprised to learn that dawn was not
nearer. It seemed to them that they had been pitching about in the waves
for a very long time, yet the day was still hours away.

The wind continued strong, the waves were higher than ever, but the
brothers had gained more confidence in the sailing qualities of the boat
and in their own ability to handle it. Less water was being shipped, and
by bailing when they had a chance, they managed to keep it from rising
too high. Now that the sky was clearing and there was more light on the
lake, they could see farther across it. As the boat rose to the top of a
wave, Blaise said suddenly, “L’isle du Paté.”

Hugh looked quickly and, before the bateau pitched down between the
waves, he caught a glimpse of a compact, abrupt, black mass towering from
the water not many miles to his right. There seemed to be no chance of
reaching the mouth of the Kaministikwia though. To turn and run in past
the south side of Pie Island was out of the question. The square sail
would be worse than useless, and the laden bateau would inevitably be
swamped in the trough of the waves.

The stars were waning in the paling sky. The short summer night was
drawing to a close and dawn was approaching. South and west of Pie Island
and nearer at hand, lower lines of shore appeared, the chain of islands
from one of which the adventurers had set out for the Isle Royale. Those
islands, across several miles of heaving water, were still too far away
to be reached. Wind and waves were carrying the bateau by. The sun,
coming up in an almost clear sky, found the boat still running southwest
on a course almost parallel with the unattainable chain of islands.

As the hours passed, the boys were encouraged to discover that they were
drawing gradually nearer and nearer to the islands on the right. What was
still better, they were bearing straight towards land ahead, continuous,
high land they knew must be the main shore. It seemed that they must
reach the mainland not many miles to the southwest of the place where the
chain of islands diverged from it. Hugh had long since ceased to be
particular where he landed, if it was only in some spot where food might
be obtained. Rations the day before had been very scanty, and he was
exceedingly hungry.

The wind was strong but steady, the waves long and high. The bateau, as
it plunged down into the trough, continued to ship a little water, but
the boys kept it down by bailing when a hand and arm could be spared.
They were borne nearer and nearer to the land. As they ran past a group
of small islets not more than a half mile distant, with a larger and
higher island showing beyond them, Hugh glanced that way and considered
trying to turn.

Blaise guessed his brother’s thought. “The mainland is not far now,” he
said, “and we go straight towards it. Let us go on until we can land
without danger to the furs. There will be more chance to find food on the
mainland also.”

Both of the younger boy’s arguments had weight with Hugh. He gave up the
idea of attempting to turn, and they went on with wind and waves. At the
end of another hour they were bearing down upon an irregular, rocky
point.

“Is that island or mainland, do you think?” Hugh inquired.

“Mainland,” was the unhesitating reply. “I remember the place. Have I not
passed it three times in the last two moons?”

Hugh made no answer. He himself must have passed that spot twice within
two months, but there were so many rocky points along the shore. Hugh was
observing enough in the white man’s way, but he did not see how Blaise
could remember all those places and tell them apart.

The bateau ran close to the point. When a bay came into view, Hugh
expected Blaise to steer in, but the latter made no move to do so.

“It is steep and rocky there,” he explained, with a nod towards the
abrupt-shored cove. “Beyond yet a little way is a better place, shallow
and well protected.”

Past another point and along a steep rock shore they sailed. Here they
were in much calmer water, for the points broke the force of wind and
waves. As they approached a group of small islands, Blaise remarked, “It
is best to take down the sail. We can paddle in.”

Accordingly Hugh lowered the sail and took up his paddle, while Blaise
steered the bateau in among the islets. In a few moments the haven lay
revealed, an almost round bay, its entrance nearly closed by islets. The
islands and the points on either side were rocky, but the shores of the
bay were low and densely wooded with tamarack, cedar and black spruce.
The water was almost calm, and the boys made a landing on a bit of beach
on the inner side and under the high land of the right hand point.

Hugh had not realized that he was particularly tired. The strain of the
dangerous voyage had kept him alert, but he had had no sleep for two
nights. Now, suddenly, an overpowering weariness and weakness came over
him. His legs almost collapsed under him. He dropped down on the beach,
too utterly exhausted to move. He was on solid land again, but he could
scarcely realize it. His head was dizzy, and the moment his eyes closed
he seemed to be heaving up and down again.




                                 XXXII
                    THE FIRE AT THE END OF THE TRAIL


When Hugh woke, the dizziness and sense of swaying up and down were gone.
He sat up, feeling strangely weak and hollow, and looked about him. The
bateau was drawn up on the beach, but Blaise was nowhere in sight. From
the shadows Hugh could tell that the sun was on its downward journey. He
had slept several hours. He was just gathering up his courage to get up,
when he heard a stone rattling down the rock hill behind him. Turning his
head, he saw Blaise descending. The boy was carrying several fish strung
on a withe. Hugh eyed those fish with hungry eyes. He could almost eat
them raw, he thought. He got to his feet and looked around for fuel. Not
until he had a fire kindled, and,—too impatient to let it burn down to
coals or to wait for water to heat,—was holding a piece of fish on a
crotched stick before the blaze, did he ask his younger brother where he
had been.

“I slept for a while,” Blaise admitted, “but not for long. My hunger was
too great. I took my gun and my line and climbed to the top of the point.
I went along the steep cliff, but I found no game and no tracks. Then I
came to that rocky bay. The shores are steep there and the water clear. I
climbed out upon a rock and caught these fish. They are not big, but they
are better than no food.”

“They certainly are,” Hugh agreed whole-heartedly.

The elder brother’s pride in his own strength and endurance was humbled.
He had slept, exhausted, for hours, while the half-breed boy, nearly
three years younger than himself, had walked two or three miles in search
of food.

When no eatable morsel of the fish remained, the brothers’ thoughts
turned to their next move.

“We are far nearer the Grand Portage than the Kaministikwia,” Hugh said
thoughtfully. “We had better follow my first plan and go down the shore
instead of up. We can surely find others at the Portage willing to go
with us against Ohrante.”

“It is all we can do,” Blaise assented, “unless we wait here for the wind
to change. It is almost from the north now. We must go against it if we
go up the Bay of Thunder. The other way, the shore will shelter us. But
we cannot start yet. We must wait a little for the waves to go down.”

“And in the meantime we will seek more food,” Hugh added. “Why not try
fishing among those little islands?”

The channels among the islets proved good fishing ground. By sunset the
lads had plenty of trout to insure against any danger of starvation for
another day at least. The waves had gone down enough to permit travel in
the shelter of the shore. Sailing was out of the question, and paddling
the laden bateau would be slow work, but Hugh was too impatient to delay
longer, and Blaise more than willing to go on.

After half an hour of slow progress, the younger brother made a
suggestion. “We are not far from the Rivière aux Tourtres now.” He used
the French name for the Pigeon River, a name which seems to mean “river
of turtles.” The word _tourtres_ doubtless referred to turtle doves or
pigeons. “To paddle this bateau,” Blaise went on, “is very slow, and to
reach Wauswaugoning by water we must go far out into the waves around
that long point below the river mouth. But along the south bank of the
river is an Ojibwa trail. At a bend the trail leaves the river and goes
on across the point to Wauswaugoning. We shall save time if we go that
way, by land.”

“What about the boat and the furs?”

“We will leave them behind. There is a little cove near the river mouth
where the bateau will be safe. The furs we can hide among the rocks. We
shall not be gone many days if all goes well. No white man I think and
few Ojibwas go that way. An Ojibwa will not disturb a cache,” Blaise
added confidently.

“Yet I don’t like the idea of leaving the furs,” Hugh protested.

“They will be safer there than at the Grand Portage, where the men of the
Old Company might find them.”

“Why not turn them over to the X Y clerk at the Portage?” Hugh
questioned.

“No, no. If our father had wanted them taken there he would have said so.
Again and again he said to take them to the New Company at the
Kaministikwia. He had a debt there, a small one, and he did not like the
man in charge at the Grand Portage. There was some trouble between them,
I know not what.”

Blaise was usually willing to yield to his elder brother’s judgment, but
this time he proved obstinate. Jean Beaupré’s commands must be carried
out to the letter. His younger son would not consent to the slightest
modification.

Darkness had come when the two reached the mouth of the Pigeon River, but
the moon was bright and Blaise had no difficulty steering into the little
cove. Alders growing down to the water concealed the boat when it was
pulled up among them. Blaise assured Hugh that, even in daylight, it
could not be seen from the narrow entrance to the cove. The mast was
taken down and the sail spread over the bottom of a hollow in the rocks.
On the canvas the bales of furs were piled, and a blanket was thrown over
the heap. The boys cut several poles, laid them across the hole, the ends
resting on the rock rim, and covered them with sheets of birch bark,
stripped from an old, half-dead tree. The crude roof, weighted down with
stones, would serve to keep out small animals as well as to shed rain.
All this work was done rapidly by the light of the moon.

The cache completed, Blaise led Hugh to the opening of the trail at the
river mouth. The trail, the boy said, had been used by the Ojibwas for
many years. A narrow, rough, but distinct path had been trodden by the
many moccasined feet that had travelled over it. The moonlight filtered
through the trees, and Blaise, who had been that way before, followed the
track readily. With them the brothers carried the remaining blanket, the
gun, ammunition, kettle and the rest of their fish. As Blaise had said,
the trail ran along the south bank until a bend was reached, then,
leaving the river, went on in the same westerly direction across the
point of land between the mouth of the Pigeon River and Wauswaugoning
Bay. The whole distance was not more than three miles, and the boys made
good time.

Hugh thought they must be nearing the end of the path, when Blaise
stopped suddenly with a low exclamation. The elder brother looked over
the younger’s shoulder. Among the trees ahead glowed the yellow light of
a small fire.

“Wait here a moment,” Blaise whispered. And he slipped forward among the
trees.

In a few minutes he was back again. “There are three men,” he said,
“sleeping by a fire, a white man and two Ojibwas. One of the Ojibwas I
know and he knew our father. We need not fear, but because of the white
man, we will say nothing of the furs.”

The two went forward almost noiselessly, but, in spite of their quiet
approach, when they came out of the woods by the fire, one of the Indians
woke and sat up.

“Bo-jou,” remarked Blaise.

The second Indian was awake now. “Bo-jou, bo-jou,” both replied, gazing
at the newcomers.

The white man rolled over, but before he could speak, Hugh sprang towards
him with a cry of pleasure. “Baptiste, it is good to see you! How come
you here?”

“Eh lá, Hugh Beaupré, and I might ask that of you yourself,” returned the
astonished Frenchman. “I inquired for you at the Grand Portage, but the
men at the fort knew nothing of you. When I said you were with your
brother Attekonse, one man remembered seeing him with a white man. That
was all I could learn. I was sore afraid some evil had befallen you. You
are long in returning to the Sault.”

“Yes,” Hugh replied with some hesitation. “I have stayed longer than I
intended. Is the _Otter_ at the Grand Portage, Baptiste?”

“No, she has returned to the New Fort. I came on her to the Grand
Portage. We brought supplies for the post and for the northmen going
inland to winter. There was a man at the Portage, a Canadian like myself,
who wanted sorely to go to the Kaministikwia. He has wife and child
there, and the mate of the sloop brought him word that the child was very
sick. So as I have neither wife nor child and am in no haste, I let him
have my place. Now I am returning by canoe, with Manihik and Keneu here.”

At the mention of their names, the two Indians nodded gravely towards
Hugh and repeated their “Bo-jou, bo-jou.”

“We camp here until the wind goes down,” Baptiste concluded.

During the Frenchman’s explanation, Hugh had been doing some rapid
thinking and had come to a decision. He knew Baptiste for a simple,
honest, true-hearted fellow. In one of his Indian companions Blaise had
already expressed confidence.

“Baptiste,” Hugh asked abruptly, “have you ever heard of Ohrante, the
Iroquois hunter?”

There was a fierce grunt from one of the Indians. The black eyes of both
were fixed on Hugh.

“Truly I have,” Baptiste replied promptly. “As great a villain as ever
went unhanged.”

“Would you like to help get him hanged?”

Keneu sprang to his feet. It was evident he had understood something of
what Hugh had said. “I go,” he cried fiercely in bad French. “Where is
the Iroquois wolf?”

“There is an island down the shore,” Hugh went on, “the Island of
Torture, Ohrante calls it, where he and his band take their prisoners and
torture them to death. Sometime soon he is to hold a sort of council
there.”

“How know you that?” Baptiste interrupted.

“I shall have to tell you the whole story.” Hugh turned to his
half-brother. “Blaise, shall we tell them all? Baptiste I can trust, I
know.”

“As you think best, my brother.”

Sitting on a log by the fire at the edge of the woods, while the
moonlight flooded the bay beyond, Hugh related his strange tale to the
amazed and excited Canadian and the intent, fierce-eyed Keneu, the “War
Eagle.” The other Indian also watched and listened, but it was evident
from his face that he understood little or nothing of what was said. Hugh
made few concealments. Frankly he told the story of the search for the
hidden furs, the encounters with Ohrante and his band, the capture and
escape, and what Blaise had learned from overhearing the conversations
between Monga and the Indian with the red head band. Hugh did not
mention, however, the packet he carried under his shirt, nor did he say
definitely where he and Blaise had left the bateau and the furs. Those
details were not essential to the story, and might as well be omitted.

“We know now it was through Ohrante father was killed,” the boy
concluded, “and we, Blaise and I, intend that the Iroquois shall pay the
penalty for his crime. He has other evil deeds to pay for as well, and
that isn’t all. As long as he is at liberty, he is a menace to white man
and peaceable Indian alike. He calls himself Chief of Minong, and he has
an ambition to be a sort of savage king. He is swollen with vanity and
belief in his own greatness, and he seems to be a natural leader of men,
with a sort of uncanny influence over those he draws about him. One
moment you think him ridiculous, but the next you are not sure he is not
a great man. If he succeeds in gathering a really strong band he can do
serious harm.”

Keneu gave a grunt of assent, and Baptiste nodded emphatically. “He must
be taken,” the latter said.

“Taken or destroyed, like the wolf he is,” Hugh replied grimly. “We have
a plan, Blaise and I.”

For nearly an hour longer, the five sat by the fire discussing, in
English, French and Ojibwa, Hugh’s plan. Then, a decision reached, each
rolled himself in his blanket for a few hours’ sleep.




                                 XXXIII
                          THE CAPTURE OF MONGA


Baptiste’s canoe was large enough to accommodate Hugh and Blaise, and the
party were up and away early. The lake was no longer rough, so they made
good time through Wauswaugoning Bay and around the point to the Grand
Portage. Though Baptiste had been employed, in one capacity or another,
by the Old Northwest Company, he was under no contract. An independent
spirited fellow, who came and went much as he pleased, he did not feel
under any obligation to the Old Company and was not an ardent partisan of
that organization, so he made no objection when Hugh proposed that they
try the X Y post for help in their undertaking. The men of either company
would be glad no doubt to lay hands on the rascally Iroquois but the X Y
men’s grievance was the stronger, since Ohrante had been in the employ of
the Old Company when he committed his first crime. The white man he had
slain was an independent trapper, affiliated with neither company, but
Jean Beaupré had been under contract, for the one season at least, to the
New Company. To learn that he too had come to his death through the Giant
Mohawk would add fuel to the flame of the X Y men’s anger.

Shunning the Old Company’s dock, the party crossed the bay to the X Y
landing. At the post Hugh and Blaise told as much of their story as was
essential to prove that they had really encountered Ohrante, had learned
his plans and knew where to lay hands on him. The time for the annual
meeting of the New Northwest Company, still held at the Grand Portage
post, was approaching. None of the partners or leading men had yet
arrived, but most of the northmen, as the men who wintered inland west of
the lake, were called, had come with their furs, and a considerable
number of Indians were gathered at the post. The agent in charge could
not leave, but in a very few minutes the boys had recruited a dozen men,
half-breeds and Indians, with one white man, a Scotchman, to lead them.

It would not do to approach the Island of Torture in too great force.
Hugh and Blaise, with Baptiste and the two Indians, were to go first,
find out whether Ohrante’s recruits had assembled and watch for the
coming of the chief himself. The men from the Grand Portage, in two
canoes, would start later. Hugh had a very simple plan, which promised to
be effective, to prevent Ohrante from leaving his council island before
the Grand Portage party arrived.

The plan of campaign arranged, the scouts got under way at once. As they
rounded the high point to the south and west of the Grand Portage Bay,
they noticed, coming from the open lake, a large canoe with only two men.
It was headed straight for the land, but suddenly swung about and turned
down shore. Blaise, who was second from the bow, raised his paddle for a
moment, while he gazed intently at the other canoe.

Turning his head, he called back to Hugh and Baptiste, “Red Band! We must
catch them. It is Red Band and I think Monga.”

“_Vite!_ Make speed!” ordered Baptiste. “We will separate those two from
the rest of Ohrante’s rascals.”

He scarcely needed to give the command. Keneu, in the bow, had already
quickened his powerful stroke. The others followed his lead and the five
blades dipped and rose with vigorous, rapid rhythm. The Indians ahead did
their best, bending to their paddles with desperate energy, but their
canoe was fully as large as Baptiste’s and they were two paddles to five.
The pursuers gained steadily. They must certainly overtake the fugitives.

Suddenly the fleeing canoe swerved towards the land. Keneu saw in an
instant what the two men were trying to do. They intended to beach their
boat and take to the woods, trusting to lose their pursuers in the thick
growth. The Indian bow-man gave a sharp order. Baptiste’s canoe swung in
towards shore. It must cut off the fugitives, get between them and the
land. The shore was steep and rocky, and there was no good place to beach
a boat. Yet so great was the panic of Monga and Red Band that they kept
straight on. Despairing of escape by water, they were ready to smash
their canoe on the rocks and take a chance of reaching land.

They did not even get near to the shore. In their panic haste, they
failed to notice a warning ripple and eddy ahead. Their canoe struck full
on the jagged edge of a rock just below the surface. The pursuers were
close enough to hear the ripping sound, as the sharp rock tore a great
gash in the thin bark. The water rushed in. Red Band sprang from the bow,
but Monga remained where he was in the stern, the canoe settling under
him.

The pursuers bent to their paddles and shot towards the wrecked boat.
They reached the spot just as Monga was going down, but they did not
intend to let him escape them by drowning. Keneu reached out a sinewy arm
and seized the sinking man by the neck of his deerskin shirt, while the
others threw their bodies the other way and backed water to hold the
canoe steady and keep it off the sharp rock.

The sensation of going down in that cold water must have instilled in
Monga a dread greater than his fear of capture, for he made no struggle
to free himself. As if the fellow had been a fish too large to be landed,
his captors passed him back from hand to hand until he came into the
keeping of the other Indian in the stern. The captive could not be pulled
aboard, so Manihik ordered him to hold to the rim. Kneeling face towards
the stern, he held Monga by the shoulders, and towed him behind the canoe
till Keneu found a landing place.

Red Band had disappeared. Blaise, who had watched, felt sure Monga’s
companion had not reached shore. He had gone down and had not come up.
Either he was unable to swim or had struck his head on a rock. Whatever
had happened, there was no sign of him.

When shallow water was reached, Manihik took good care that his dripping
prisoner should not escape. Monga was towed ashore and his wrists and
ankles bound with rawhide rope. He said not a word, his broad face sullen
and set.

Not until Blaise had asked him several questions in Ojibwa, did the
captive deign to speak. Even then he answered with reluctance, a word or
two at a time in sullen grunts. Then a question suddenly loosed his
tongue, and he poured out a torrent of guttural speech. The other two
Indians and Baptiste, who understood a little Ojibwa, listened intently,
but Hugh could make out no word, except the names Ohrante and Minong.

When Monga paused, Blaise, his hazel eyes shining, turned to his brother.
“We have not so many enemies to oppose us as we thought. Ohrante has only
five of his old men left. The young Iroquois who captured you is dead.”

“That fellow dead?” Hugh exclaimed. “Are you sure Monga isn’t lying?”

“He speaks the truth, I am certain,” Blaise replied confidently. “When
Ohrante found you had escaped, he was in a great rage. He held the young
Iroquois, Monga and Red Band to blame, and threatened all three with
death, unless they found you and brought you back. Because the small
canoe was gone, they believed you had escaped by water. We hoped the
empty canoe might drift up the bay, but they found it not. The Iroquois
thought you might have gone into the Bay of Manitos. Monga had no wish to
go there. He was afraid of the giant manitos, he says, but he was
desperate and at last agreed. They found our fire on the stones at the
end of that island. Monga believed you had crossed the mouth of the bay
and had gone on the other side of Minong, but the Iroquois wished to go
up the narrow channel. They went up the channel, as we know, to what they
believed to be the end. The shallow water and the fallen cedar deceived
them. So they turned back and went on across the mouth of the Bay of
Manitos.”

“What were Ohrante and the others doing all that time?”

“They searched the western side of Minong. Monga says Ohrante would not
go into the Bay of Manitos himself.”

“Then he evidently didn’t suspect our trick.”

“No, but I think perhaps the young Iroquois suspected, and that was why
he wished to search the bay.” Blaise went on with his tale. “Monga and
Red Band were in despair when they could not find you. They proposed that
the three of them should run away to the mainland, but the Iroquois was
too proud to be a coward. He wished to go on with the search or go back
to take the punishment. So Monga pretended he could see the end of a
canoe among the trees on an island. They landed, and Monga and Red Band
murdered the Iroquois and left him there. Then they started for the
mainland.”

“They were the ones we saw when we were going out of the bay.”

“Yes, they went around the long point, past that bay, and along the
northwest side of Minong, but the wind came up and they could not cross.
This morning they have crossed over.”

“We should have nothing further to fear from Monga then, even if we had
not captured him.”

Blaise shrugged contemptuously. “Monga is a coward and a fool. He says he
was angry because the traders sold him a bad musket. It exploded when he
tried to fire it and blew off his little finger. So he joined the Mohawk
wolf who boasted that he would drive the white men away. Monga thought
Ohrante was a great chief and a powerful medicine man, but when he
proposed to go to Minong, Monga was afraid. Then Ohrante told him that
Minong was a wonderful place where they would grow rich and mighty and
have everything they wished. He said he was such a great medicine man
that the spirits of the island would do his bidding.”

“And they didn’t,” put in Hugh with a grin.

The swift, flashing smile like his father’s crossed the younger boy’s
face. “Monga was disappointed to find Minong little different from the
mainland. When he heard the spirits threatening Ohrante and saw the chief
frightened, he began to lose faith in him. You escaped, and Ohrante’s
medicine was not strong enough to find you and bring you back. He would
not even go to the Bay of Manitos to seek you. So Monga knew the Chief of
Minong was just a man like other men. He has run away and wants no more
of Ohrante.”

“Just the same I think we had better keep an eye on him,” Hugh decided.
“We’ll take him with us.”

Blaise nodded. “There is still much Monga has not told us,” he replied.

It was finally settled that Baptiste and the two Indians should take the
prisoner with them, while Hugh and Blaise went on ahead in the captured
canoe. It was their plan to approach the Island of Torture under cover of
darkness. Conditions being good, the two boys paddled steadily. Late in
the afternoon they paused for a meal. They had not many more miles to go,
and would wait until nightfall. Before they had finished their supper,
Baptiste’s canoe came in sight. Monga had expressed willingness to wield
a paddle, but Baptiste did not trust him. The “Loon” rode as a compulsory
passenger, wrists and ankles still bound. At Hugh’s signal, Baptiste ran
in to shore to wait with the others for darkness.




                                 XXXIV
                             MONGA’S STORY


During the enforced wait for nightfall, Blaise put more questions to the
Indian prisoner. Monga, anxious to ingratiate himself with his captors,
talked freely.

Ohrante, the captive said, after his first crime, capture and escape, had
fled with Monga and the other Ojibwa who had helped him to get away. At
the lake shore they had come across two Iroquois hunters, the tall fellow
with the malicious grin and another. When Ohrante proposed to take refuge
on Minong, the Ojibwas held back. The Mohawk, however, told them a long
story about how his mother, a captive among the Iroquois, had been a
direct descendant of the ancient tribe or clan who had once lived on
Minong and had mined copper there. Her ancestors had been chieftains of
that powerful people, Ohrante asserted, and he himself was hereditary
Chief of Minong. From his mother’s people and also from his father, who
was a Mohawk medicine man, the giant claimed to have inherited marvellous
magic powers. He had further increased those powers by going through
various mysterious experiences and ordeals. The manitos of Minong, he
said, awaited his coming. He had had a dream, several moons before, in
which the spirits, in the forms of birds and beasts, had appeared to him
and begged him to come and rule over them. They would do his bidding and
aid him to destroy his enemies and to become chief of all the tribes
about the Upper Lakes. He would unite those tribes into a powerful nation
and drive the white men from the country.

Persuaded by Ohrante’s arguments, the four Indians accompanied him to
Minong. Their first camp was made on the southwestern end of the island.
There Ohrante and the two Ojibwas, secure from pursuit, remained while
the others crossed again to the mainland and brought back more recruits,
an Ojibwa, a Cree and another Iroquois hunter. The band of eight roamed
about the western side of the island by land and water. Most of the
winter they spent in a long, narrow bay, where, according to Monga, they
found many pieces of copper. In the spring, in search of the wonders
their chief had promised them, they reached the northeastern end of the
island. Then came a hard storm of wind, rain and snow, accompanied by
fog. Three days after the storm, when the waves had gone down, the band
entered, for the first time, the bay west of the long point. There they
found and captured Jean Beaupré and Black Thunder. It was evident from
Monga’s tale that he knew nothing of the hidden furs. Ohrante had
accepted the story Jean Beaupré had told of having lost everything in the
storm, when his bateau, driven out of its course, had been dashed into a
rift in the rocks of the long point. Undoubtedly Beaupré must have had
some warning of the approach of the Indians, for he had had time, as the
boys knew, to secrete the furs. The fact that Black Thunder had suffered
an injury to one leg, when the boat was wrecked, might account for the
failure of the two to dodge the giant and his band.

When Monga finished this part of his story, Blaise turned from him to
translate to Hugh.

“Ask him,” the elder brother suggested, “if father knew he was on the
Isle Royale.”

Blaise put the question and translated the reply. “Monga says our father
knew not where he was. The weather was thick and cloudy, there was no sun
and it was not possible to see far. Our father thought he was somewhere
on the mainland. Ohrante did not tell him where he was. The chief wished
no man to know the hiding place. The prisoners were kept bound. They were
given something cooked from leaves that made them sleep sound. Then they
were put in the canoes and taken to the other end of the island. By night
they were brought across to the Isle of Torture.”

“That explains father’s not telling you where he was wrecked. He had no
idea he had been driven to Minong. But why did Ohrante bring his captives
away over here? What was his motive? Can you find out?”

Again Blaise asked a question, listening gravely to the answer. “Monga
says that he and Ohrante and the other Ojibwa camped on that little
island they now call the Isle of Torture, when they first escaped from
our father, and Ohrante dreamed that night that he had many white
captives and put them to the torture one after another. Monga thinks it
was because of that dream that the chief brought his captives over to
that island.”

“How did father escape?” Hugh questioned eagerly.

Again Blaise turned to Monga, and soon had the rest of the story. At the
Torture Island, Ohrante had met with several recruits, who brought with
them a supply of liquor stolen from some trading post. The torture of the
two captives, Ohrante’s part of the entertainment, was postponed until
night. During the day the party feasted and drank. They consumed all of
the liquor, which was full strength, not diluted with water as it usually
was before being sold to the Indians. By night the whole band were lying
about the island in a heavy stupor. Even the lookout, who had been
stationed in a tree to give warning of the approach of danger, had come
down to get his share.

When the band came to their senses next morning, they found the prisoners
gone. The thongs with which they had been tied lay on the ground, one
piece of rawhide having been worn through by being pulled across a
sharp-edged bit of rock. A canoe was gone and another had a great hole in
it, but a third boat, on the other side of the island, the prisoners had
not found. Monga’s Ojibwa comrade, the one who had helped Ohrante to
escape justice, had been set to guard the captives. In a rage, Ohrante
threatened the fellow with torture in their stead. The guard begged to be
allowed to track the escaped prisoners, and the chief consented. A high
wind had blown all night and the lake was rough, too rough for the
fugitives to have travelled far by water. The channel between shore and
island was protected from the wind, however, and some of the band crossed
and found the canoe the escaped prisoners had used. Black Thunder’s lame
leg prevented rapid travelling, and at the Devil Track River, the
negligent guard and one of the Iroquois overtook the fugitives. Stealing
quietly upon them, the Ojibwa attacked Jean Beaupré, the Iroquois, Black
Thunder. Black Thunder struggled desperately, and the Iroquois was
obliged to fight for his life. He slew Black Thunder, only to find his
Ojibwa companion lying dead a little farther on. Jean Beaupré was gone.

The Iroquois tried to follow Beaupré, but, being himself wounded, fell
fainting from loss of blood. Monga and another of the band, sent after
the two by Ohrante, found the Iroquois unable to travel without help. It
was Monga who had kindled the cooking fire, the remains of which Hugh had
found. Blaise spoke of finding the blood-stained tunic and Monga said
that the Iroquois had stripped it from Black Thunder, but Monga and the
other Indian would not let him carry the shirt away for fear of the
vengeance of the thunder bird pictured upon it. The three returned to the
Island of Torture without attempting to follow Beaupré farther. When the
lake calmed, two of the band took the winter catch of furs to the Grand
Portage and exchanged them for supplies. Then the whole party returned to
Minong, living for some time at the southern end. In a later raid they
captured the unfortunate Indian, Ohrante’s personal enemy, whom the boys
had seen being tortured. One of the chief’s men was killed in the
encounter, another deserted and several were left on the mainland to
obtain recruits.

The rest went back to Minong and travelled to the northern end again. In
the bay west of the long, high point, they found the spot the crew of the
_Otter_ had cleared, and built their wigwams there. The discovery that
someone else had visited the place made Ohrante a bit uneasy, and he kept
a lookout stationed on the high ridge. When the Beaupré brothers reached
the point, all of the band except two happened to be away on a hunting
trip. The two guards, neglectful of lookout duty, had failed to see the
lads approach. It must have been one of them who had fired the shot that
aroused the boys at dawn. Ohrante and one canoe of the hunting party
returned that very day. The call that had so startled Hugh, when he was
about to open the packet, was a signal from one of the camp guards to the
returning chief. Luckily for the brothers they were well hidden in the
pit, and Ohrante and his men were back at their camp long before the two
lads reached theirs. The other canoe of hunters did not return until the
following day. Luck had been poor, and Monga proposed to his companions
that they round the long, high point and look for game on the other side.
They were headed towards the rocky tip, when, suddenly, before their
astonished eyes, a giant form appeared on the open rocks. The giant
turned, looked straight at the canoe, then seemed to sink into the
ground. Just as he vanished, however, a second giant, even taller than
the first, loomed up. Monga and his comrades turned and fled. Monga
looked back once, just in time to see one of the giants spring up out of
the rocks, he said. The frightened Indians took refuge beyond the low
point on the other side of the bay, and stayed there until the fog came
in, before daring to venture to camp. They told Ohrante of seeing
Nanibozho and Kepoochikan on the end of the long point, but he, to
strengthen his followers’ belief in his magical powers, insisted next day
on rounding the point. In the Bay of Manitos, the Chief of Minong had the
scare of his life.

Darkness had come by the time Blaise had learned all this from the
prisoner and had translated it to Hugh and Baptiste. It was time to make
a start. Monga was left behind, and to prevent his crying out or
attracting attention in any way, he was gagged and tied to a tree. Then
the others embarked in Baptiste’s canoe. The weather favored them. The
night was dark, not a ray of moonlight penetrating the thick clouds. Only
a light breeze rippled the water and the air was unusually warm.

Noiselessly, through the deepest shadows, the canoe approached the Island
of Torture. From the upper end, the black mass appeared to be quite
deserted. No gleam of fire shone through the trees. As the canoe slipped
along close to the mainland, however, the flickering light of a small
fire appeared ahead. That fire was not on the island, but on the mainland
opposite. Swerving in to shore, the canoe was brought to a stop, its prow
just touching a bit of beach. Without speaking a word, and making
scarcely a sound, the five stepped out, deposited the boat upon the
pebbles and gathered around it in a knot.

Keneu, his mouth close to the half-breed boy’s ear, whispered a word or
two. Blaise nodded, and in an instant the Indian was gone into the
darkness. Blaise turned to Hugh and explained in the softest of whispers:
“Keneu goes to learn who they are.”

Silent, almost motionless, the rest of the party remained standing on the
bit of beach in the thick darkness of the sheltering bushes. Hugh’s eyes
were fastened on the black, silent island across the narrow channel. Had
Ohrante changed his plans? He felt his younger brother’s hand on his arm,
and turned about. He could just distinguish a low, hissing sound, which
he realized was the Indian making his report to Blaise.

The sound ceased and the boy’s lips were at Hugh’s ear. “There are four
men camping there. One is an Iroquois. They wait for Ohrante to come.
Then they go to the island.”

“He hasn’t come yet, then?” Hugh whispered back.

“No, these are new men except the Iroquois. They come to join Ohrante.
They have liquor, but the Iroquois will not let them drink until the
chief comes.”

“Then the only thing we can do is wait.”

“That is all. We can watch the island from here. When Ohrante comes we
shall know it.”




                                  XXXV
                         THE FALL OF THE GIANT


As the wait might be long, the party decided to snatch a few minutes’
sleep, one of them remaining on the lookout for the arrival of the Chief
of Minong. It was some time after midnight, when Keneu, who was doing
guard duty, discerned something moving on the lake, coming down shore. He
laid his hand on the half-breed boy’s forehead, and Blaise woke at once.

“A canoe,” the Indian whispered.

Blaise raised his head to look. “The men from the Grand Portage. What
idiots! Why not keep closer in?”

The Indian’s hand pressed the lad’s shoulder warningly. “Wait,” he
breathed. “Let them go by.”

Secure in the black shelter of the alders that overhung the bit of beach,
Blaise watched the approaching canoe. It came on rapidly, confidently. As
it drew close in the darkness of the channel between mainland and island,
the boy’s eyes could make out no details. But his ears caught something
that made him heartily glad he had not signalled that canoe as had been
his first thought. What he heard was an order spoken in Ojibwa, in the
unmistakable, high-pitched, nasal voice of Ohrante. In obedience to the
command, the canoe swung away from the mainland towards the Island of
Torture, and disappeared in the blackness of its margin.

Blaise drew a long breath and whispered in Keneu’s ear, “Go watch the
camp and see what they do.”

Keneu made no reply, but Blaise knew he was gone, though he heard no
sound as the Indian slipped through the bushes. In the same quiet way
that Keneu had waked him, by laying his hand on the forehead of each,
Blaise aroused his companions. In a few minutes all were sitting up, wide
awake, staring at the dark water and the impenetrable blackness of the
island. There were no stars or moon. The air was unusually warm and
sultry. A pale flash lit up the dark sky for an instant. Some moments
later a low rumbling came to their ears. A storm now might spoil all
their plans, thought Hugh anxiously.

A gleam of light shone through the trees at the farther end of the
island. A fire had been kindled as a signal that the Chief of Minong had
arrived. Again the sky was lit by a white flash. Again the thunder rolled
and rumbled. From down the channel came a sound of splashing water. No
canoe, paddled by Indians, ever made such a splashing as that. “Have they
all jumped in? Are they swimming across?” thought Hugh.

Rolling over, he crawled down the beach. His head almost in the water, he
gazed down the channel. Another flash of lightning swept the sky. Hugh
crouched low, but in the instant of the illumination, he saw, crossing
from mainland to island, a canoe with several men, and in its wake
something black rising above the water. Hugh could not believe that the
swimming thing was really what, in the instant’s flash of light, it
appeared to be.

He turned to slip up the beach again, and found Blaise at his side. In
silence the two went back to their place beside the canoe. A few minutes
later, Blaise felt a hand on his shoulder, and Keneu’s voice spoke in his
ear, in a low, hissing whisper.

“They have left their camp. They have crossed to the island, where a fire
now burns.”

“How many canoes?”

“Only one.”

“Are other men coming?”

“I think not. I think they are the only ones.”

Hugh was growing impatient. It had been his intention to wait to put his
plan into operation until the party on the island had feasted and drunk
and were sleeping. The coming storm, however, threatened to thwart his
strategy. Bad weather might drive Ohrante and his band to the mainland in
search of better shelter. Even if they remained on the island, a violent
storm would delay action. In daylight he could not carry out his scheme,
and dawn was not far off. There was grave risk in acting now, but to
delay might mean to lose all chance of success. Again the lightning
flashed more brightly, the thunder rolled louder and at a shorter
interval. He must act now if at all. He put his mouth to his younger
brother’s ear.

“We must get those canoes. A storm may spoil our chance. We dare not
wait.”

“Yes,” agreed Blaise. He understood the situation quite as well as Hugh.
There was no need for more than the one word.

“You and I and Keneu will go,” Hugh went on. “When we get across, Keneu
must remain with our canoe. The others must stay here to stop the men
from the Grand Portage when they come.”

“Yes,” Blaise replied again, and rose to his feet. “Come,” he said
briefly to the Indian.

In a few whispered words, Hugh explained to Baptiste that he and Manihik
must remain where they were. The Frenchman was inclined to grumble. He
did not like the idea of the boys’ going into action without his support.
Hugh was firm, however, and as the whole plan was his, he was by right
the leader, so Baptiste was forced to submit. By the time Hugh had
finished his explanation, Blaise and Keneu had the canoe in the water.

Just as Hugh, as leader, took his place in the bow, a flash of lightning
lit up the sky. The moment the flash was over, the canoe was off, Blaise
in the center and Keneu in the stern. The paddling was left to the
Indian, Hugh dipping his blade only now and then on one side or the
other, as a signal to the steersman.

The natural clearing, where the fire now blazed bright, was at the other
end of the little island. If the Indians were all gathered around the
fire, they could not see the canoe crossing from the mainland. Someone
might be down at the shore, but the attacking party had to take a chance
of that. Luckily the short passage was accomplished before the next
flash.

On the inner side of the little island, the trees and bushes grew down to
the water. In absolute silence, the canoe slipped along, close in.
Another bright flash of lightning, quickly followed by a peal of thunder,
caused Keneu to hold his blade motionless. The boat was well screened by
the trees, however, and there was no sign that it had been observed.

That flash of lightning had revealed something to Hugh. Just ahead was a
little curve in the margin of the island, and beyond it, a short, blunt
projection, a bit of beach with alders growing well down upon it. On the
beach were two canoes. To reach the spot, however, it would be necessary
to pass an open gap, a sort of lane leading up from the shore to the
place where the fire burned. Through the gap the firelight shone out upon
the water. It would never do to try to pass in the canoe.

Hugh dipped his paddle and gave it a twist. The Indian understood. He too
saw the firelight on the water. The canoe swerved towards shore and
slowed down. Before it could touch and make a noise, Hugh was overside,
stepping quickly but carefully, to avoid the slightest splash. Blaise
followed. Keneu remained in the boat. He allowed his end to swing in far
enough so he could grasp an overhanging branch and hold the craft steady.

Now came the most difficult part of the undertaking, to creep in the
darkness through the dense growth, which came clear to the water line,
around to the beach where the canoe lay. Hugh, as leader, intended to go
first, but he did not get the chance. Before he realized what the younger
boy was about, Blaise had slipped past him and taken the lead. It was
well he did so for Blaise, slender and agile, was an adept at wriggling
his way snake-like, and he seemed to have a sixth sense in the darkness
that Hugh did not possess. So Hugh was constrained to let his younger
brother pick the route. He had all he could do to follow without rustling
or crackling the thick growth. Progress was necessarily very slow, only a
few feet or even inches at a time. Whenever there came a lightning flash,
both lay flat. The flashes were less revealing in the dense growth, and
luckily the trees stood thick between the two lads and the fire.

Blaise had reached the edge of the gap through which the yellow-red
firelight shone. He could see the fire itself, a big, roaring pile, and
the figures moving around it. The sound of voices speaking Ojibwa and
Iroquois came to his ears. Reaching back with one foot, he gave Hugh a
little warning kick, then looked for some way to cross the open space.

The Island of Torture, like most of the islands off the northwest shore
of the lake, consisted of a low, flat-topped, rock ridge descending
gradually to the water on one side and more abruptly on the other. The
lane was a natural opening down a steep slope from the ridge top to the
water. Just at the base of the open rock lane, at the very edge of the
water, grew a row of low shrubs, so low that they did not shut off the
light of the fire, but cast only a narrow line of shadow. The one way to
cross that gap without being seen was to crawl along in the shadow of
those bushes. The water might be shallow there or it might be deep. Lying
flat, Blaise put one hand into the shadowed water. His fingers touched
bottom. He felt around a little, then crawled forward. The water proved
to be only a few inches deep. Prostrate, he wriggled along the rock
bottom in the narrow band of shadow. When Blaise had reached the shelter
of the woods beyond, Hugh followed, taking extreme care to slip along
like an eel, without a splash.

The brothers were now but a short distance from the canoes. The thick
growing alders fringing the pebbles shut off the firelight. The chief
peril was that someone might be guarding the boats. Eyes and ears
strained for the slightest sign of danger, the two crawled forward on
hands and knees. They reached the first canoe without alarm and went on
to the second. Still hidden from the Indians around the fire, the boys
lifted the canoe and turned it bottom side up. Blaise drew his knife from
the sheath and carefully, without a sound of ripping, cut a great hole in
the bark, removing a section between the ribs. Then the two carried the
boat out a few feet and deposited it upon the water. It began to fill
immediately, the water entering the big hole with only a slight gurgling
noise. Even that sound alarmed the lads. They beat a hasty retreat and
lay close under the alders. The Indians around the fire, however, were
too engrossed in their own affairs to heed the sound, if indeed it
carried that far.

A man with a full, deep voice was speaking at length, his tones reaching
the boys where they lay hidden. Every now and then his listeners broke in
with little grunts and ejaculations of approval or assent. A crash of
thunder, following close upon a bright flash, drowned his voice. When the
rumbling ceased, he was no longer speaking. Something else was happening
now. Little cries and grunts, accompanied by the beating together of wood
and metal and the click of rattles in rude rhythm, came to the boys’
ears.

“They are dancing,” thought Hugh. “What fools to make such an exhibition
here where a boat may pass at any moment! Ohrante is certainly insane or
very sure he is invincible. It is time we finished our work.”

He missed Blaise from his side, and crept down to the remaining canoe,
supposing his younger brother had gone that way. Blaise was not there.
Hugh waited several minutes, listening to the grunts and cries, which,
low voiced at first, were growing louder and faster as the dancers warmed
to their work. Suddenly one of them uttered a yell, which was followed by
quite a different sound, an animal’s bellow of rage or pain. Hugh was
both alarmed and curious. What was going on up there, and what had become
of Blaise?

The elder brother crept back across the pebbles, pushed his way
cautiously among the alders, and crawled up a short, steep slope topped
by more bushes and trees, through which the firelight flickered. The
noises of the dance, broken by louder cries and angry bellows, continued.
Crouching low in the shadow, Hugh peeped through at the strangest scene
he had ever looked upon.

In the open space a big fire blazed, casting its reddish-yellow glare
over the picture. Between the fire and the boy, the dancing figures of
the Indians passed back and forth, crouching, stamping, gesticulating, to
the rhythm of their hoarse cries and the clicking of their weapons and
rattles. All were naked to the waist and some entirely so. Their faces
and bodies were streaked and daubed with black and white, yellow and red.
Near by, in dignified immobility, stood the self-styled Chief of Minong,
his tall feather upright in his head band, his face and breast
fantastically painted in black and vermilion. His bronze body was
stripped to the waist, displaying to advantage the breadth of his
shoulders and the great muscles of his long arms. A little shudder passed
down Hugh’s spine as his eyes rested upon that huge, towering form and
the set, cruel face. Yet it was neither the war dance nor Ohrante that
held his surprised gaze longest.

A little to one side of the fire, the tall birch rose straight and high
above its fellows. To its white stem was tied, not a human victim this
time, but the dark form of an animal, a moose. As the beast tossed its
head about in frenzy, Hugh could see that its antlers, still covered with
the fuzzy velvet, had no broad palms and bore but two points on either
side. It was a crotch horn or two year old. Every few moments one or
another of the dancers would utter a yell or war whoop, dart towards the
captive animal, strike it a swift blow with knife, spear or firebrand,
then leap nimbly out of the way of its tossing antlers and flying
forefeet. A favorite sport seemed to be to strike the beast upon the
sensitive end of the nose with a burning pole. The moose was wild with
rage and pain, plunging madly about, swaying the birch almost to
breaking. The bonds were strong and the tree failed to snap, yet the boy
wondered how long it would be before something gave and freed the
frenzied beast. He thought the young moose did not realize his own
strength, but when he should find it out, Hugh did not want to be in the
way.

The watcher was just about to retreat to the beach, when the dancing
suddenly stopped. Drops of rain were beginning to fall, but the shower
was not the reason for the cessation of the dancing. Ohrante had raised
his arm in an impressive gesture. The dancers lowered their weapons and
rattles and drew back to the other side of the fire. Majestically Ohrante
stalked forward and confronted the plunging moose. Lightning flashed,
thunder pealed, there came a sharp dash of rain, the fire hissing and
spitting like a live thing as the drops struck it. But Ohrante did not
intend to be deprived of his cruel sport by a mere thunder shower. He
held in his right hand a long pole with a knife lashed to the end.
Standing just out of reach of the enraged beast’s antlers and forefeet,
he lunged directly at its throat.

There came a dazzling flash, a flare of light, a stunning crash that
seemed to shatter Hugh’s ear-drums. Even as the flash blinded his eyes,
they received a momentary impression of a great black object hurtling at
and over the giant Indian, as he toppled backward into the fire. The next
instant a huge bulk crashed through the bushes almost on top of the boy.
A tremendous splash followed.




                                 XXXVI
                     HOW BLAISE MISSED HIS REVENGE


The rain came down in torrents. Thunder pealed and crashed, and Hugh, a
roaring in his head, his whole body shaking convulsively, lay on his face
among the bushes. A hand seized his shoulder and instantly he came to
himself. He started up and reached for the knife he had borrowed from
Baptiste, then knew it was his half-brother who was speaking.

“Quick,” Blaise whispered. “Follow me close.”

The rain was lessening, the thunder peals were not so deafening. From the
beach below came the sound of voices. With bitterness, Hugh realized that
he and Blaise had delayed too long. The Indians had reached the one canoe
and had discovered that the other was missing.

“They are going to get away. We must do something to stop Ohrante at
least.”

“Ohrante is stopped, I think,” Blaise replied quietly. “I go to see.” And
he wriggled through the dripping bushes.

Hugh followed close on his younger brother’s heels. Out from the shelter
of the trees into the open space the two crawled. Where the fire had
blazed there was now only smoke. A flash of lightning illuminated the
spot. It seemed utterly deserted except for one motionless form. Without
hesitation the brothers crept across the open, no longer single file, but
side by side. The thing they had caught sight of when the lightning
flashed, lay outstretched and partly hidden by the cloud of smoke from
the quenched fire. As they drew near, there was another bright flash.
There lay the giant figure of Ohrante the Mohawk, his head among the
blackened embers, his broad chest battered to a shapeless mass by the
sharp fore hooves of the frenzied moose. Hugh was glad that the flash of
light lasted but an instant. The merciful darkness blotted out the
horrible sight. He turned away sickened.

The report of a musket, another and another, shouts and yells and
splashings, came from the channel between island and mainland.

“The men from the Grand Portage,” cried Hugh. “They have come just in
time. Not all of Ohrante’s rascals will escape.”

He ran down the open lane, Blaise after him. The flashes and reports, the
shouts and cries, proved that a battle was on. The black shapes of canoes
filled with men were distinguishable on the water. A pale flash of the
now distant lightning revealed to the lads one craft close in shore. It
contained but one man.

“Keneu,” Hugh called.

The Indian had seen the boys. He swerved the canoe towards the line of
low bushes at the foot of the gap, and Hugh and Blaise ran out into the
water to step aboard. The yells and musket shots had ceased. The fight
seemed to be over. But another canoe was coming in towards the island
beach. Did that boat hold friends or enemies?

“Holá, Hugh Beaupré,” a familiar voice called. “Where are you?”

“Here, Baptiste, all right, both of us,” Hugh shouted in reply.

“Thank the good God,” Baptiste ejaculated fervently.

The canoe came on and made a landing on the beach. Hugh, Blaise and Keneu
beached their craft near by.

“Did you catch those fellows?” Hugh asked eagerly.

“We sunk their canoe and some are drowned. Others may have reached shore.
The rest of our men have gone over there to search. But where is Ohrante?
We have seen nothing of him. Is he still on this isle?”

“Yes, he is here,” Hugh replied, a little shudder convulsing his body.
“But Ohrante is no longer to be feared.”

“He is dead? Who killed him? One of you?” Baptiste glanced quickly from
one lad to the other.

“No, the victim he was torturing killed him.”

“Another victim? What became of him? Did he escape?”

“He escaped. By now he is probably in safety.”

“Good! Then we have——”

A shout from the top of the island interrupted Baptiste. The other men
from the canoe, who had scattered to search for any of Ohrante’s band who
might be in hiding, had discovered the body. The boys and Baptiste went
up to join them, and Hugh described what he had seen and how the Chief of
Minong had come to his death.

“A frightful fate truly, but he brought it upon himself by torturing the
beast,” the Frenchman exclaimed. “But how was it they had a captive
moose? Surely they did not bring it across from the Isle Royale?”

“No.” It was Blaise who spoke. “Keneu says the men from the mainland
brought the moose. Keneu saw the beast tied to a tree at their camp. It
was a two year old and seemed tame. He thought it had been raised in
captivity. They brought it to kill for a feast. Hugh and I saw it swim
across behind their canoe.”

“Ohrante had no human captive to torture.” Hugh shuddered again,
realizing that he himself had been the intended victim. “He had no man to
practice his cruelty upon, so he used the animal. What a fiend the fellow
was!”

Not one of Ohrante’s band was found on the island. The sudden fall of
their chief had so appalled them that they had fled, every man of them,
to the beach and had crowded into the one remaining canoe. The
explanation of Ohrante’s fate was clear. The lightning had struck the top
of the tall birch. The young moose, already wild with pain and fright,
was driven to utter frenzy by the crash and shock. It had burst its bonds
and plunged straight at its nearest tormentor, knocking him into the
fire, stamping upon his body with its sharp hooves, and then dashing for
the lake and freedom. A terrible revenge the crotch horn had taken.

Hugh’s plan had been to sink one canoe and steal the other, leaving the
Chief of Minong and his followers marooned on the little island. He had
hoped that the loss of the boats would not be discovered before morning.
Then the besieging party could demand the surrender of Ohrante, promising
his followers, if necessary, that they should go free if they would
deliver up their chief. Even if they refused, there seemed no chance for
Ohrante to get away. Before he could build canoes, the attacking party
could easily raise a force sufficient to rush the island. If members of
the band should attempt to swim the channel or cross it on a raft, they
would be at the mercy of the besiegers. Sooner or later the giant and his
men would be compelled to yield.

In accordance with this plan, the boys had set out to make away with
Ohrante’s canoes. When ample time to carry out the manœuvre had passed,
and they did not return, Baptiste had grown anxious. The sounds of the
war dance and the bellows of the captive moose, carrying across the
water, had increased his alarm. The men from the Grand Portage arriving
just before the storm broke, Baptiste signalled them and they held
themselves in readiness to go to the rescue of the lads. The watchers saw
the lightning strike the island. They heard the tumult as the frightened
Indians, believing some supernatural power had intervened to destroy
their chief, fled to the beach. At once Baptiste’s men, regardless of the
storm, started for the island. A flash of lightning showed them a canoe
crossing to the mainland. Attack followed and the canoe was sunk or
overturned. One boat of the attacking party put into shore to cut off the
flight of any of the band who might succeed in reaching land. The other
turned to the island.

When the whole force came together at dawn, they had taken two prisoners
and had found the dead bodies of two other Indians besides Ohrante. The
Mohawk had brought but three men with him and four others had joined him
at the island. Three were therefore unaccounted for. They might have been
drowned or they might have escaped. The important thing was that Ohrante
was dead and his band broken up.

The headlong flight of the great chief’s followers was explained by one
of the prisoners. The Indians had believed the giant Iroquois invincible.
He had the reputation, as Monga had said, of being a medicine man or
magician of great powers. He claimed to have had, in early youth, a dream
in which it was revealed to him that no human hand would ever strike him
down. The dream explained the boldness and rashness of his behavior. It
also threw light on his fear of powers not human. Suddenly he was felled,
not by human hand indeed, but by the dreadful thunder bird and the hooves
of a beast which surely must be a spirit in disguise. The invincible was
vanquished and his followers were panic stricken. The three men Ohrante
had brought from Minong led the flight. They had seen and heard the
threatening manifestations of Nanibozho, Kepoochikan and their attendant
manitos on that island. Two of the band, the captive said, had been left
on Minong to guard the camp. Of them neither Hugh nor Blaise ever heard
again. Whether the Indians remained on the island or whether after a time
they returned to the mainland and learned of Ohrante’s death, the lads
never knew.

With the fate of the giant Mohawk all the attacking party were well
satisfied except Blaise. He was so glum and silent that Hugh could not
understand what had come over the lad. After their return to the Grand
Portage, Blaise opened his heart.

“I wished to kill our father’s enemy with my own hands,” he confessed to
Hugh. “It was the duty of you or me to avenge him, and I wished for the
honor. You saw not in the darkness that I took my musket with me. When we
crept in the water below that open place, I carried the musket on my back
not to wet it. And then when I knelt among the trees and he stood there
with his arms folded, I had him in good range. But, my brother, I could
not shoot. It was not that I feared for myself or you. No, I felt no
fear. I could not shoot him unarmed and with no chance to fight for his
life. I am a fool, a coward, a disgrace to the Ojibwa nation.”

“No, no, you are nothing of the kind,” Hugh cried indignantly. “There is
no braver lad anywhere. You are no coward, you are a white man, Blaise,
and an honorable one. That is why you couldn’t shoot Ohrante in the back
from ambush. I know there are white men who do such things and feel no
shame. But would father have done it, do you think? Would he?”

A little anxiously, Hugh waited for the answer. He had known his father
so little, and Jean Beaupré had lived long among savages. The reply came
at last, slowly and thoughtfully.

“No,” said the younger son, “no, our father would never have shot a man
in the back.”




                                 XXXVII
                          THE PACKET IS OPENED


With eager curiosity Hugh Beaupré sat watching Monsieur Dubois unwrap the
mysterious packet. The adventurous journey was over. The ex-members of
Ohrante’s band, including Monga, had been turned over to the fur
companies to be dealt with. The pelts had been safely delivered to the
New Northwest Company at the Kaministikwia, Jean Beaupré’s small debt
cancelled, and the rest of the price paid divided between the two boys.
The furs had proved of fine quality, and Hugh was well satisfied with his
share. He had been given a draft on the company’s bankers in Montreal,
who had paid him in gold. Blaise had chosen to take his half in winter
supplies, and, with Hugh and Baptiste to back him, had won the respect of
the company’s clerk as a shrewd bargainer. At the Kaministikwia, the
younger boy had found his mother with a party of her people, and Hugh,
less reluctant than at the beginning of his journey, had made her
acquaintance. Regretfully parting with Blaise, the elder brother had
joined the great canoe fleet returning with the furs. He was able to
qualify as a canoeman, and he had remained with the fleet during the
whole trip to Montreal. Of that interesting but strenuous journey there
is no space to tell here.

One of the lad’s first acts after reaching the city had been to seek out
Monsieur Dubois. Dubois proved to be a prominent man among the French
people of Montreal, and Hugh had found him without difficulty. After
explaining how he had come by the packet, the lad had placed it in the
Frenchman’s hands. He had learned from this thin, grave, white-haired man
that he, René Dubois, had lived in the Indian country for many years.
During the first months of Jean Beaupré’s life in the wild Superior
region, Dubois, though considerably older, had been the friend and
companion of Hugh’s father. When an inheritance had come to him, the
elder man had been called back to Montreal, where he had since lived.
Beaupré, on his infrequent returns to civilization, had made brief calls
on his old comrade, but they had no common business interests and had
never corresponded. Monsieur Dubois was, therefore, at a loss to
understand why Hugh’s father had been so anxious that this packet should
reach him.

He undid the outer wrapping, glanced at his own name on the bark label,
cut the cord, broke the seals and removed the doeskin. Several thin white
sheets of birch bark covered with fine writing in the faint, muddy,
home-made ink, and a small, flat object wrapped in another thin cover of
doeskin, were all the packet contained. When his fingers closed on the
object within the skin cover, the man’s face paled, then flushed. His
hands trembled as he removed the wrapping. For several moments he sat
staring at the little disk of yellow metal, turning it over and over in
his fingers. Why it should affect Monsieur Dubois so strongly Hugh could
not imagine. It was obvious that the white-haired man was trying to
control some strong emotion. Without a word to the boy, he laid the disk
down, and Hugh could see that it was a gold coin. Taking the bark sheets
from the table where he had laid them, Dubois scanned them rapidly, then
turned again to the beginning and read them slowly and intently. When he
raised his eyes, Hugh was surprised to see that they were glistening with
tears. His voice trembled as he spoke.

“You cannot know, Hugh Beaupré, what a great service you have done me. It
is impossible that I can ever repay you. You do not understand, you
cannot, until I explain. But first I would ask you a question or two, if
you will pardon me.”

“Of course,” replied Hugh wonderingly. “I shall be glad to answer
anything that I can, Monsieur Dubois.”

“Well then, about that half-brother of yours, what sort of a lad is he?”

“As fine a lad as you will find anywhere, Monsieur,” Hugh answered
promptly. “When I first received his letter, I was prejudiced against
him, I admit.” He flushed and hesitated.

Dubois nodded understandingly. “But now?” he questioned.

“Now I love him as if he were my _whole_ brother,” Hugh said warmly. “We
went through much together, he saved me from a horrible fate, and I
learned to know him well. A finer, truer-hearted fellow than Blaise never
existed.”

Again Dubois nodded, apparently well satisfied. “And his mother?”

“I was surprised at his mother,” Hugh replied with equal frankness. “She
is Indian, of course, but without doubt a superior sort of Indian. For
one thing she was clean and neatly dressed. She is very good-looking too,
her voice is sweet, her manner quiet, and she certainly treated me
kindly. She loves Blaise dearly, and,—I think—she really loved my
father.”

Once more Monsieur Dubois nodded, a light of pleasure in his dark eyes.
“I asked,” he said abruptly, “because, you see, she is my daughter.”

“Your daughter? But she is an Indian!”

“Only half Indian, but no wonder you are surprised. I will explain.”

Monsieur Dubois then told the wondering boy how, about thirty-eight years
before, when he was still a young man, he had taken to the woods. It was
in the period between the conquest of Canada by the English and the
outbreak of the American Revolution, long before the formation of the
Northwest Fur Company, when the fur traders in the Upper Lakes region
were practically all French Canadians and free lances, each doing
business for himself. In due time, René Dubois, like most of the others,
had married an Indian girl. A daughter was born to them, a pretty baby
who had found a very warm spot in the heart of her adventurous father.
Before she was two years old, however, he lost her. He had left his wife
and child at an Indian village near the south shore of Lake Superior,
while he went on one of his trading trips. On his return he found the
place deserted, the signs plain that it had been raided by some
unfriendly band. There was no law in the Indian country, and in that
period, shortly after the so-called French and Indian War, when the
Algonquin Indians had sided with the French and the Iroquoian with the
English, conditions were more than usually unstable. For years Dubois
tried to trace his wife and daughter or learn their fate, but never
succeeded.

“And now,” he concluded, his voice again trembling with feeling, “you
bring me proof that my daughter still lives, that she was the wife of my
friend, and that in his son and hers I have a grandson and an heir.”
Monsieur Dubois took up the gold coin and handed it to Hugh. One face had
been filed smooth and on it, cut with some crude tool, were the outlines
of a coat-of-arms. “I did that myself,” Dubois explained. “It is the arms
of my family. When the child was born, I made that and hung it about her
neck on a sinew cord.”

“And Blaise’s mother still had it?” exclaimed Hugh.

“No, she had lost it, but your father recovered it. Read the letter
yourself.” He handed Hugh the bark sheets.

It was an amazing letter. Jean Beaupré merely mentioned how he had found
the Indian girl a captive among the Sioux, had bought her, taken her away
and married her. No doubt he had told all this to Dubois before. Beaupré
had not had the slightest suspicion that his wife was other than she
believed herself to be, a full-blooded Ojibwa. She had been brought up by
an Ojibwa couple, but in a Sioux raid her supposed father and mother had
been killed and she had been captured. Nearly two years before the
writing of the letter, Beaupré had happened to receive a gold coin for
some service rendered an official of the Northwest Company. His wife had
examined the coin with interest, and had said that she herself had once
had one nearly like it, the same on one side, she said, but different on
the other. She had always worn it on a cord around her neck, but when she
was captured, a Sioux squaw had taken it from her. At first Beaupré
thought that the thing she had possessed had been one of the little
medals sometimes given by a priest to a baptized child, but she had
insisted that one side of her medal had been like the coin. Then he
remembered that his old comrade Dubois had told of the coin, bearing his
coat-of-arms, worn by his baby daughter. Jean Beaupré said nothing of his
suspicions to his wife, but he resolved to find out, if he could, whether
she was really the daughter of René Dubois. On this quest, he twice
visited the Sioux country west of the Mississippi. The autumn before the
opening of this story, he learned of the whereabouts of the very band
that had held his wife a captive. After sending, by an Indian messenger,
a letter to Hugh at the Sault, asking the boy to wait there until his
father joined him in the spring, Beaupré left at once for the interior.
He was fortunate enough to find the Sioux band and the chief from whom he
had bought the captive more than fifteen years before. The chief,
judiciously bribed and threatened, had sought for the medal and had found
it in the possession of a young girl who said her mother had given it to
her. When Beaupré questioned the old squaw, she admitted that she had
taken the coin from the neck of an Ojibwa captive years before. How the
Ojibwa couple who had brought the girl up had come by her, Beaupré was
unable to find out, but he had no doubt that she was really the daughter
of René Dubois. He resolved to send the proof of his wife’s parentage to
Montreal by his elder son, if Hugh had really come to the Sault and had
waited there. If Hugh was not there, the elder Beaupré would go to the
city himself. It was plain that he had not received either of the letters
Hugh had sent after him, nor had Hugh ever got the one his father had
written him. Fearing that if any accident should happen to him, the coin
and the story might never reach his old comrade, Beaupré had written down
the tale and prepared the packet. Even in his dying condition he
remembered it and told Blaise to go get it. Evidently, when he discovered
he was in danger of falling into Ohrante’s hands, he had feared to keep
the packet with him, so had hidden it with the furs. If he escaped the
giant, he could return for both furs and packet, but if the coin came
into Ohrante’s possession it would be lost forever. The letter, however,
said nothing of all that. It had undoubtedly been written before Beaupré
set out on his home journey.

With deep emotion Hugh deciphered the fine, faint writing on the bark
sheets. He was glad from the bottom of his heart that he and Blaise had
been able to recover the packet and deliver it to the man to whom it
meant so much. If Hugh had had any dreams of some strange fortune coming
to himself through the packet, he forgot them when Monsieur Dubois began
to speak again.

“I shall go to the Kaministikwia at once, if I can find means of reaching
there this autumn. At least I shall go as far as I can and finish the
journey in the spring. Wherever my daughter and my grandson are, I will
seek them out. I have no other heirs and Blaise, my grandson, shall take
the place of a son. I will bring them back to Montreal, or, if that does
not seem best, I will remain in the upper country with them. Whether my
grandson chooses to live his life in civilization or in the wilderness, I
can provide him with the means to make that life both successful and
useful.”

The elder brother’s heart was glowing with happiness. He knew that his
own mother’s people would help him to a start in life, and now his
younger brother, his half-breed,—no, quarter-breed—brother Blaise would
have a chance too. Hugh had no doubt that Blaise Beaupré would make the
most of his opportunities.

It only remains to say that when René Dubois saw the mother of Blaise,
her resemblance to himself and to her own mother thoroughly convinced him
that there had been no mistake. He more than fulfilled to both his
daughter and his grandson the promises Hugh had heard him make.


                                THE END


                  MYSTERY AND ADVENTURE BOOKS FOR BOYS


              _12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Colored jackets._
                      _Price 50 cents per volume._
                     _Postage 10 cents additional._

SOUTH FROM HUDSON BAY, by E. C. Brill

        A thrilling tale of the coming of settlers from France and
        Switzerland to the wilderness of the Prairie country of the Red
        River district, and the adventures of three boys who find
        themselves entangled in the fate of the little colony.

THE SECRET CACHE, by E. C. Brill

        The father of two boys, a fur hunter, has been seriously injured
        by an Indian. Before he dies he succeeds in telling the younger
        son about a secret cache of valuable furs. The directions are
        incomplete but the boys start off to find the Cache, and with the
        help of men from a nearby settlement capture the Indian and bring
        him to justice.

THE ISLAND OF YELLOW SANDS, by E. C. Brill

        An exciting story of Adventure in Colonial Days in the primitive
        country around Lake Superior, when the forest and waters were the
        hunting ground of Indians, hunters and trappers.

LOST CITY OF THE AZTECS, by J. A. Lath

        Four chums find a secret code stuck inside the binding of an old
        book written many years ago by a famous geologist. The boys
        finally solve the code and learn of the existence of the remnant
        of a civilized Aztec tribe inside an extinct crater in the
        southern part of Arizona. How they find these Aztecs, and their
        many stirring adventures makes a story of tremendous present-day
        scientific interest that every boy will enjoy.


                        CHAMPION SPORTS STORIES

                         By NOEL SAINSBURY, JR.

_Every boy enjoys sport stories. Here we present three crackerjack
stories of baseball, football, and basketball, written in the vernacular
of the boy of to-day, full of action, suspense and thrills, in language
every boy will understand, and which we know will be enthusiastically
endorsed by all boys._

                _Large 12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Jacket
                  in color. Price 50 cents per volume.
                     Postage 10 cents additional._

1. CRACKER STANTON _Or The Making of a Batsman_

        Ralph Stanton, big, rawboned and serious, is a product of the
        backwoods and a crack rifle shot. Quick thinking and pluck bring
        him a scholarship to Clarkville School where he is branded
        “grind” and “dub” by classmates. How his batting brings them
        first place in the League and how he secures his appointment to
        West Point make CRACKER STANTON an up-to-the-minute baseball
        story no lover of the game will want to put down until the last
        word is read.

2. GRIDIRON GRIT _Or The Making of a Fullback_

        A corking story of football packed full of exciting action and
        good, clean competitive rivalry. Shorty Fiske is six-foot-four
        and the product of too much money and indulgence at home. How
        Clarkville School and football develop Shorty’s real character
        and how he eventually stars on the gridiron brings this thrilling
        tale of school life and football to a grandstand finish.

3. THE FIGHTING FIVE _Or the Kidnapping of Clarkville’s Basketball Team_

        Clarkville School’s basketball team is kidnapped during the game
        for the State Scholastic Championship. The team’s subsequent
        adventures under the leadership of Captain Charlie Minor as he
        brings them back to the State College Gymnasium where the two
        last quarters of the Championship game are played next evening,
        climaxes twenty-four pulsating hours of adventure and basketball
        in the FIGHTING FIVE...


                          SORAK JUNGLE SERIES

                         By HARVEY D. RICHARDS

_The name Sorak means War Cry in the Malay country. He grows up among the
most primitive of the Malay aborigines, and learns to combat all the
terrors of the jungle with safety. The constant battle with nature’s
forces develop Sorak’s abilities to such an extent that he is
acknowledged the chief warrior in all his section of the jungle._

                  _12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Jacket in
                   color. Price 50 cents per volume.
                     Postage 10 cents additional._

1. SORAK OF THE MALAY JUNGLE _or How Two Young Americans Face Death and
        Win a Friend_

        Two boys, Dick and Jack Preston are shipwrecked off the Malay
        Peninsula and are rescued by Sorak. Their adventures in trying to
        get back to civilization make an absorbing story.

2. SORAK AND THE CLOUDED TIGER _or How the Terrible Ruler of the North Is
        Hunted and Destroyed_

        A huge clouded tiger, almost human, leads a pack of red dholes
        into Sorak’s country, and it takes all of Sorak’s ingenuity, and
        the aid of his friends to exterminate the pack.

3. SORAK AND THE SULTAN’S ANKUS _or How a Perilous Journey Leads to a
        Kingdom of Giants_

        Sorak and his friends are trapped by a herd of elephants, and
        finally run away with by the leader to an unknown valley where a
        remnant of Cro-Magnan race still exists. Their exciting
        adventures will hold the reader enthralled until the last word.

4. SORAK AND THE TREE-MEN _or the Rescue of the Prisoner Queen_

        Captured by a band of Malay slavers, Sorak and his friends are
        wrecked on an island off the coast of Burma in the Mergui
        Archipelago. Their escape from the island with the Prisoner Queen
        after a successful revolution brings the fourth book of this
        series to an exciting and unusual conclusion.


                      TOP NOTCH DETECTIVE STORIES

                            By WILLIAM HALL

                    _Each story complete in itself_

_A new group of detective stories carefully written, with corking plots;
modern, exciting, full of adventure, good police and detective work._

                _Large 12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Jacket
                  in color. Price 50 cents per volume.
                     Postage 10 cents additional._

1. SLOW VENGEANCE _or the Mystery of Pete Shine_

        A young newspaper man, whose brother is on the police force,
        becomes strangely involved in the mysterious killing of an
        Italian bootblack. Suspicion points to a well-known politician
        but he proves that it was impossible for him to have done the
        deed. Then the reporter, who for a time turns detective, gets a
        clue revolving about a startling, ancient method of combat. He
        follows this up, watches a masked duelist and, with the help of a
        girl, catches the murderer who justifies his deed on the plea of
        Slow Vengeance. You will be interested in reading how the
        reporter got out of a tight corner.

2. GREEN FIRE _or Mystery of the Indian Diamond_

        A golf caddy who has a leaning toward amateur detective work,
        together with his younger cousin, are accidentally mixed up in
        the strange loss, or theft, of a valuable diamond, known as Green
        Fire. It was once the eye of an East Indian idol. To clear his
        young cousin of suspicion, the older boy undertakes to solve the
        mystery which deepens when one man disappears and another is
        found murdered on the golf course. But, by a series of clever
        moves on the part of the young sleuth, the crime is solved and
        the diamond found in a most unusual hiding place. A rapidly
        moving, exciting tale. You will like it.

3. HIDDEN DANGER _or The Secret of the Bank Vault_

        A young detective, who, in his private capacity, has solved
        several mysteries, decides to open an office in another city. He
        meets a young bank clerk and they become partners just when the
        clerk’s bank is mysteriously bombed and the cashier is reported
        missing. It is not until next day that it is discovered that the
        bank vault has been entered in some secret manner and a large sum
        stolen. The regular detectives declared “spirits” must have
        robbed the bank but the two young detectives prove that a clever
        gang did it and also kidnapped the aged cashier. Not a dull page
        from first to last. A clever story.


                           NORTHWEST STORIES

                           By LeROY W. SNELL

_A new group of stories laid in the Canadian Northwest by Mr. Snell, a
master writer of the glories and the thrilling adventures of the Canadian
Northwest Mounted Police. Each book is an individual story, well written,
beautifully bound, and contains a story that all boys will enjoy._

                _Large 12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Jacket
                  in color. Price 50 cents per volume.
                     Postage 10 cents additional._

1. THE LEAD DISK

        Tom Baley, leaving college goes north into Canada, hoping to join
        the Northwest Mounted Police. His application is turned down by
        his own uncle, an officer on the force, but after many thrilling
        adventures and encounters with the Disk Gang he is able to win
        the coveted uniform.

2. SHADOW PATROL

        Luke Myers is sent into the Caribou Mountains to solve the
        mystery of The Shadow, about whom many conflicting stories are
        told. There are struggles with the outlaws, and finally a great
        running battle down the fog-obscured mountain trails ... at the
        end of which the outlaws are captured and the mystery of The
        Shadow is solved.

3. THE WOLF CRY

        Donald Pierce is sent to solve the mystery of his father’s
        disappearance, into the unmapped barrens where King Stively
        weaves his web of wickedness, and rules a territory the size of a
        small empire with a ruthlessness and cunning that baffles the
        best of the Mounted Police. Behind all is the dread Wolf Cry
        which causes brave men to shudder....

4. THE SPELL OF THE NORTH

        Sergeant David Stanlaw, stationed at Spirit River, is puzzled by
        a local killing, the disappearance of the body, the finding of a
        code message, and by the mystery of the “Listening Forest,” which
        casts a shadow of dread over the little town of Wiggin’s Creek.
        With the help of Jerry Bartlett they capture the leaders of the
        gang and solve the mystery of the “Listening Forest.”

5. THE CHALLENGE OF THE YUKON

        Robert Wade whose patrol runs from Skagway on Chattam Strait
        north into the Yukon country follows in the wake of a stampede to
        a new gold strike. With the aid of his friend, Jim MacPhail, Wade
        frustrates the outlaws, who try to trap the whole town behind the
        “Pass of the Closing Door,” and then races them to and across the
        breaking ice floes of the Yukon. A strong adventure story all
        boys will enjoy.


                            THE BOMBA BOOKS

                            By ROY ROCKWOOD

            _12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. With Colored jacket.
        Price 50 cents per volume. Postage 10 cents additional._

_Bomba lived far back in the jungles of the Amazon with a half-demented
naturalist who told the lad nothing of his past. The jungle boy was a
lover of birds, and hunted animals with a bow and arrow and his trusty
machete. He had only a primitive education, and his daring adventures
will be followed with breathless interest by thousands._

  1. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY
  2. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY AT THE MOVING MOUNTAIN
  3. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY AT THE GIANT CATARACT
  4. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY ON JAGUAR ISLAND
  5. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY IN THE ABANDONED CITY
  6. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY ON TERROR TRAIL
  7. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY IN THE SWAMP OF DEATH
  8. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY AMONG THE SLAVES
  9. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY ON THE UNDERGROUND RIVER
  10. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY AND THE LOST EXPLORERS
  11. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY IN A STRANGE LAND
  12. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY AMONG THE PYGMIES
  13. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY AND THE CANNIBALS
  14. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY AND THE PAINTED HUNTERS
  15. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY AND THE RIVER DEMONS
  16. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY AND THE HOSTILE CHIEFTAIN


                        THE BASEBALL JOE SERIES

                           By LESTER CHADWICK

             _12mo. Illustrated. Price 50 cents per volume.
                     Postage 10 cents additional._

1. BASEBALL JOE OF THE SILVER STARS _or The Rivals of Riverside_

2. BASEBALL JOE ON THE SCHOOL NINE _or Pitching for the Blue Banner_

3. BASEBALL JOE AT YALE _or Pitching for the College Championship_

4. BASEBALL JOE IN THE CENTRAL LEAGUE _or Making Good as a Professional
        Pitcher_

5. BASEBALL JOE IN THE BIG LEAGUE _or A Young Pitcher’s Hardest
        Struggles_

6. BASEBALL JOE ON THE GIANTS _or Making Good as a Twirler in the
        Metropolis_

7. BASEBALL JOE IN THE WORLD SERIES _or Pitching for the Championship_

8. BASEBALL JOE AROUND THE WORLD _or Pitching on a Grand Tour_

9. BASEBALL JOE: HOME RUN KING _or The Greatest Pitcher and Batter on
        Record_

10. BASEBALL JOE SAVING THE LEAGUE _or Breaking Up a Great Conspiracy_

11. BASEBALL JOE CAPTAIN OF THE TEAM _or Bitter Struggles on the Diamond_

12. BASEBALL JOE CHAMPION OF THE LEAGUE _or The Record that was Worth
        While_

13. BASEBALL JOE CLUB OWNER _or Putting the Home Town on the Map_

14. BASEBALL JOE PITCHING WIZARD _or Triumphs Off and On the Diamond_


                       ADVENTURE STORIES FOR BOYS

                          By JOHN GABRIEL ROWE


               _12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Colored Jacket.
                       Price 50 cents per volume.
                     Postage 10 cents additional._

_Every boy who knows the lure of exploring and who loves to rig up huts
and caves and tree-houses to fortify himself against imaginary enemies
will enjoy these books, for they give a vivid chronicle of the doings and
inventions of a group of boys who are shipwrecked and have to make
themselves snug and safe in tropical islands where the dangers are too
real for play._

1. CRUSOE ISLAND

        Dick, Alf and Fred find themselves stranded on an unknown island
        with the old seaman Josh, their ship destroyed by fire, their
        friends lost.

2. THE ISLAND TREASURE

        With much ingenuity these boys fit themselves into the wild life
        of the island they are cast upon after a storm.

3. THE MYSTERY OF THE DERELICT

        Their ship and companions perished in tempest at sea, the boys
        are adrift in a small open boat when they spy a ship. Such a
        strange vessel!—no hand guiding it, no soul on board,—a derelict

4. THE LIGHTSHIP PIRATES

        Modern Pirates, with the ferocity of beasts, attack a lightship
        crew;—recounting the adventures that befall the survivors of that
        crew—and—“RETRIBUTION.”

5. THE SECRET OF THE GOLDEN IDOL

        Telling of a mutiny, and how two youngsters were unwillingly
        involved in one of the weirdest of treasure hunts,—and—“THE
        GOLDEN FETISH.”

6. SERGEANT DICK

        The Canadian Northwest police has the reputation of always
        getting their man, and Sergeant Dick upholds the tradition in a
        story of great adventure.

7. THE CARCAJOU (kärcájöu)

        A sequel to Sergeant Dick, with the Carcajou proving his worth in
        a series of adventures that will hold the interest of any boy.


          These books may be purchased wherever books are sold
               _Send for Our Free Illustrated Catalogue_


             CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY, Publishers    New York




                          Transcriber’s Notes


--Copyright notice provided as in the original printed text—this e-text
  is public domain in the country of publication.

--Silently corrected palpable typos; left non-standard spellings and
  dialect unchanged.







End of Project Gutenberg's The Secret Cache, by E. C. [Ethel Claire] Brill

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SECRET CACHE ***

***** This file should be named 43293-0.txt or 43293-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/3/2/9/43293/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Rod Crawford, Dave Morgan
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg eBook, Andrew Marvell, by Augustine Birrell


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Andrew Marvell


Author: Augustine Birrell



Release Date: December 25, 2005  [eBook #17388]

Language: English


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANDREW MARVELL***


E-text prepared by Irma Spehar, Louise Pryor, and the Project Gutenberg
Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net/) from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries
(http://www.archive.org/details/toronto)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries. See
      http://www.archive.org/details/andrewmarvell00birruoft

      The caret character (^) indicates that the remainder of the word
      is superscripted.
      Italicized words or phrases are placed between underscore (_)
      marks.





English Men of Letters
Edited by John Morley

ANDREW MARVELL

by

AUGUSTINE BIRRELL







New York
The MacMillan Company
London: MacMillan & Co., Ltd.
1905
All rights reserved
Copyright, 1905,
By the MacMillan Company.

Set up and electrotyped. Published September, 1905.
Norwood Press
J.S. Cushing & Co.--Berwick & Smith Co.
Norwood, Mass., U.S.A.





PREFACE


I desire to express my indebtedness to the following editions of
Marvell's Works:--

   (1) _The Works of Andrew Marvell, Esq., Poetical, Controversial, and
       Political_: containing many Original Letters, Poems, and Tracts
       never before printed, with a New Life. By Captain Edward
       Thompson. In three volumes. London, 1776.

   (2) _The Complete Works in Verse and Prose of Andrew Marvell, M.P._
       Edited with Memorial-Introduction and Notes by the Rev. Alexander
       B. Grosart. In four volumes. 1872.

       (_In the Fuller Worthies Library._)

   (3) _Poems and Satires of Andrew Marvell, sometime Member of
       Parliament for Hull._ Edited by G.A. Aitken. Two volumes.
       Lawrence and Bullen, 1892.

       _Reprinted_ Routledge, 1905.

Mr. C.H. Firth's Life of Marvell in the thirty-sixth volume of _The
Dictionary of National Biography_ has, I am sure, preserved me from
some, and possibly from many, blunders.

                                                         A.B.

3 NEW SQUARE, LINCOLN'S INN,
            June 3, 1905.




CONTENTS


CHAPTER I
                                                  PAGE
EARLY DAYS AT SCHOOL AND COLLEGE                    1


CHAPTER II

"THE HAPPY GARDEN-STATE"                           19


CHAPTER III

A CIVIL SERVANT IN THE TIME OF THE COMMONWEALTH    48


CHAPTER IV

IN THE HOUSE OF COMMONS                            75


CHAPTER V

"THE REHEARSAL TRANSPROSED"                       151


CHAPTER VI

LAST YEARS IN THE HOUSE OF COMMONS                179


CHAPTER VII

FINAL SATIRES AND DEATH                           211


CHAPTER VIII

WORK AS A MAN OF LETTERS                          225


INDEX                                             233




ANDREW MARVELL




CHAPTER I

EARLY DAYS AT SCHOOL AND COLLEGE


The name of Andrew Marvell ever sounds sweet, and always has, to use
words of Charles Lamb's, a fine relish to the ear. As the author of
poetry of exquisite quality, where for the last time may be heard the
priceless note of the Elizabethan lyricist, whilst at the same moment
utterance is being given to thoughts and feelings which reach far
forward to Wordsworth and Shelley, Marvell can never be forgotten in his
native England.

Lines of Marvell's poetry have secured the final honours, and incurred
the peril, of becoming "familiar quotations" ready for use on a great
variety of occasion. We may, perhaps, have been bidden once or twice too
often to remember how the Royal actor

    "Nothing common did, or mean,
     Upon that memorable scene,"

or have been assured to our surprise by some self-satisfied worldling
how he always hears at his back,

    "Time's wingèd chariot hurrying near."

A true poet can, however, never be defiled by the rough usage of the
populace.

As a politician Marvell lives in the old-fashioned vivacious
history-books (which if they die out, as they show some signs of doing,
will carry with them half the historic sense of the nation) as the hero
of an anecdote of an unsuccessful attempt made upon his political virtue
by a minister of the Crown, as a rare type of an inflexible patriot, and
as the last member of the House of Commons who was content to take wages
from, instead of contributing to the support of, his constituents. As
the intimate friend and colleague of Milton, Marvell shares some of the
indescribable majesty of that throne. A poet, a scholar, a traveller, a
diplomat, a famous wit, an active member of Parliament from the
Restoration to his death in 1678, the life of Andrew Marvell might _a
priori_ be supposed to be one easy to write, at all events after the
fashion in which men's lives get written. But it is nothing of the kind,
as many can testify. A more elusive, non-recorded character is hardly to
be found. We know all about him, but very little of him. His parentage,
his places of education, many of his friends and acquaintances, are all
known. He wrote nearly four hundred letters to his Hull constituents,
carefully preserved by the Corporation, in which he narrates with much
particularity the course of public business at Westminster.
Notwithstanding these materials, the man Andrew Marvell remains
undiscovered. He rarely comes to the surface. Though both an author and
a member of Parliament, not a trace of personal vanity is noticeable,
and vanity is a quality of great assistance to the biographer. That
Marvell was a strong, shrewd, capable man of affairs, with enormous
powers of self-repression, his Hull correspondence clearly proves, but
what more he was it is hard to say. He rarely spoke during his eighteen
years in the House of Commons. It is impossible to doubt that such a
man in such a place was, in Mr. Disraeli's phrase, a "personage." Yet
when we look for recognition of what we feel sure was the fact, we fail
to find it. Bishop Burnet, in his delightful history, supplies us with
sketches of the leading Parliamentarians of Marvell's day, yet to
Marvell himself he refers but once, and then not by name but as "the
liveliest droll of the age," words which mean much but tell little. In
Clarendon's _Autobiography_, another book which lets the reader into the
very clash and crowd of life, there is no mention of one of the author's
most bitter and cruel enemies. With Prince Rupert, Marvell was credited
by his contemporaries with a great intimacy; he was a friend of
Harrington's; it may be he was a member of the once famous "Rota" Club;
it is impossible to resist the conviction that wherever he went he made
a great impression, that he was a central figure in the lobbies of the
House of Commons and a man of much account; yet no record survives
either to convince posterity of his social charm or even to convey any
exact notion of his personal character.

A somewhat solitary man he would appear to have been, though fond of
occasional jollity. He lived alone in lodgings, and was much immersed in
business, about a good deal of which we know nothing except that it took
him abroad. His death was sudden, and when three years afterwards the
first edition of his poems made its appearance, it was prefaced by a
certificate signed "Mary Marvell," to the effect that everything in the
book was printed "according to the copies of my late dear husband."
Until after Marvell's death we never hear of Mrs. Marvell, and with this
signed certificate she disappears. In a series of Lives of Poets' Wives
it would be hard to make much of Mrs. Andrew Marvell. For different but
still cogent reasons it is hard to write a life of her famous husband.

Andrew Marvell was born at Winestead in Holdernesse, on Easter Eve, the
31st of March 1621, in the Rectory House, the elder Marvell, also
Andrew, being then the parson of the parish. No fitter birthplace for a
garden-poet can be imagined. Roses still riot in Winestead; the
fruit-tree roots are as mossy as in the seventeenth century. At the
right season you may still

    "Through the hazels thick espy
    The hatching throstle's shining eye."

Birds, fruits and flowers, woods, gardens, meads, and rivers still make
the poet's birthplace lovely.

    "Loveliness, magic, and grace,
    They are here--they are set in the world!
    They abide! and the finest of souls
    Has not been thrilled by them all,
    Nor the dullest been dead to them quite.
    The poet who sings them may die,
    But they are immortal and live,
    For they are the life of the world."

Holdernesse was not the original home of the Marvells, who would seem to
have been mostly Cambridgeshire folk, though the name crops up in other
counties. Whether Cambridge "men" of a studious turn still take long
walks I do not know, but "some vast amount of years ago" it was
considered a pleasant excursion, either on foot or on a hired steed,
from Cambridge to Meldreth, where the Elizabethan manor-house, long
known as "the Marvells'," agreeably embodied the tradition that here it
was that the poet's father was born in 1586. The Church Registers have
disappeared. Proof is impossible. That there were Marvells in the
neighbourhood is certain. The famous Cambridge antiquary, William Cole,
perhaps the greatest of all our collectors, has included among his
copies of early wills those of several Marvells and Mervells of Meldreth
and Shepreth, belonging to pre-Reformation times, as their pious gifts
to the "High Altar" and to "Our Lady's Light" pleasingly testify. But
our Andrew was a determined Protestant.

The poet's father is an interesting figure in our Church history.
Educated at Emmanuel College, from whence he proceeded a Master of Arts
in 1608, he took Orders; and after serving as curate at Flamborough, was
inducted to the living of Winestead in 1614, where he remained till
1624, in which year he went to Hull as master of the Grammar School and
lecturer, that is preacher, of Trinity Church. The elder Marvell
belonged, from the beginning to the end of his useful and even heroic
life, to the Reformed Church of England, or, as his son puts it, "a
conformist to the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, though
I confess none of the most over-running and eager in them." The younger
Marvell, with one boyish interval, belonged all through his life to the
paternal school of religious thought.

Fuller's account of the elder Marvell is too good to be passed over:--

   "He afterwards became Minister at Hull, where for his lifetime he was
   well beloved. Most facetious in discourse, yet grave in his carriage,
   a most excellent preacher who, like a good husband, never broached
   what he had new brewed, but preached what he had pre-studied some
   competent time before. Insomuch that he was wont to say that he would
   cross the common proverb which called Saturday the working-day and
   Monday the holyday of preachers. It happened that Anno Dom. 1640,
   Jan. 23, crossing Humber in a Barrow boat, the same was sandwarpt,
   and he was drowned therein (with Mrs. Skinner, daughter to Sir Edward
   Coke, a very religious gentlewoman) by the carelessness, not to say
   drunkenness of the boatmen, to the great grief of all good men. His
   excellent comment upon St. Peter is daily desired and expected, if
   the envy and covetousness of private persons _for their own use_
   deprive not the public of the benefit thereof."[6:1]

This good man, to whom perhaps, remembering the date of his death, the
words may apply, _Tu vero felix non vitæ tantum claritate sed etiam
opportunitate mortis_, was married at Cherry Burton, on the 22nd of
October 1612, to Anne Pease, a member of a family destined to become
widely known throughout the north of England. Of this marriage there
were five children, all born at Winestead, viz. three daughters, Anne,
Mary, and Elizabeth, and two sons, Andrew and John, the latter of whom
died a year after his birth, and was buried at Winestead on the 20th
September 1624.

The three daughters married respectively James Blaydes of Sutton,
Yorkshire, on the 29th of December 1633; Edmund Popple, afterwards
Sheriff of Hull, on the 18th of August 1636; and Robert More. Anne's
eldest son, Joseph Blaydes, was Mayor of Hull in 1702, having married
the daughter of a preceding Mayor in 1698. The descendants of this
branch still flourish. The Popples also had children, one of whom,
William Popple, was a correspondent of his uncle the poet's, and a
merchant of repute, who became in 1696 Secretary to the Board of Trade,
and the friend of the most famous man who ever sat at the table of that
Board, John Locke. A son of this William Popple led a very comfortable
eighteenth-century life, which is in strong contrast with that of his
grand-uncle, for, having entered the Cofferers' Office about 1730, he
was made seven years later Solicitor and Clerk of the Reports to the
Commissioners of Trade and Plantations, and in 1745 became in
succession to a relative, one Alured Popple, Governor of the Bermudas, a
post he retained until his death, which occurred not

    "Where the remote Bermudas ride
     In the ocean's bosom unespied,"

but at his house in Hampstead. So well placed and idle a gentleman was
almost bound to be a bad poet and worse dramatist, and this William
Popple was both.

Marvell's third sister, Elizabeth, does not seem to have had issue, a
certain Thomas More, or Moore, a Fellow of Magdalen College, Cambridge,
whose name occurs in family records, being her stepson.

In the latter part of 1624 the elder Marvell resigned the living of
Winestead, and took up the duties of schoolmaster and lecturer, or
preacher, at Hull. Important duties they were, for the old Grammar
School of Hull dates back to 1486, and may boast of a long career of
usefulness, never having fallen into that condition of decay and
disrepute from which so many similar endowments have been of late years
rescued by the beneficent and, of course, abused action of the Charity
Commissioners. Andrew Marvell the elder succeeded to and was succeeded
by eminent headmasters. Trinity Church, where the poet's father preached
on Sundays to crowded and interested congregations, was then what it
still is, though restored by Scott, one of the great churches in the
north of England.

The Rev. Andrew Marvell made his mark upon Hull. Mr. Grosart, who lacked
nothing but the curb upon a too exuberant vocabulary, a little less
enthusiasm and a great deal more discretion, to be a model editor, tells
us in his invaluable edition of _The Complete Works in Verse and Prose
of Andrew Marvell, M.P._,[8:1] that he had read a number of the elder
Marvell's manuscripts, consisting of sermons and miscellaneous papers,
from which Mr. Grosart proceeds:--

   "I gather three things.

   "(1) That he was a man of a very brave, fearlessly outspoken
   character. Some of his practical applications in his sermons before
   the Magistrates are daring in their directness of reproof, and
   melting in their wistfulness of entreaty.

   "(2) That he was a well-read man. His Sermons are as full of
   classical and patristic allusions and pat sayings from the most
   occult literatures as even Bishop Andrewes.

   "(3) That he was a man of tireless activity. Besides the two offices
   named, he became head of one of the Great Hospitals of the Town
   (Charter House), and in an address to the Governors placed before
   them a prescient and statesmanlike plan for the better management of
   its revenues, and for the foundation of a Free Public Library to be
   accessible to all."

When at a later day, and in the midst of a fierce controversy, Andrew
Marvell wrote of the clergy as "the reserve of our Christianity," he
doubtless had such men as his father in his mind and memory.

It was at the old Grammar School of Hull, and with his father as his
_Orbilius_, that Marvell was initiated into the mysteries of the Latin
grammar, and was, as he tells us, put to his

      "Montibus, inquit, erunt; et erant submontibus illis;
      Risit Atlantiades; et me mihi, perfide, prodis?
      Me mihi prodis? ait.

   "For as I remember this scanning was a liberal art that we learn'd at
   Grammar School, and to scan verses as he does the Author's prose
   before we did or were obliged to understand them."[8:2]

Irrational methods have often amazingly good results, and the Hull
Grammar School provided its head-master's only son with the rudiments of
learning, thus enabling him to become in after years what John Milton
himself, the author of that terrible _Treatise on Education_ addressed
to Mr. Hartlibb, affirmed Andrew Marvell to be in a written testimonial,
"a scholar, and well-read in the Latin and Greek authors."

Attached to the Grammar School there was "a great garden," renowned for
its wall-fruit and flowers; so by leaving Winestead behind, our
"garden-poet," that was to be, was not deprived of inspiration.

Apart from these meagre facts, we know nothing of Marvell's boyhood at
Hull. His clerical foe, Dr. Parker, afterwards Bishop of Oxford, writes
contemptuously of "an hunger-starved whelp of a country vicar," and in
another passage, which undoubtedly refers to Marvell, he speaks of "an
unhappy education among Boatswains and Cabin-boys," whose unsavoury
phrases, he goes on to suggest, Marvell picked up in his childhood. But
truth need not be looked for in controversial pages. The best argument
for a married clergy is to be found, for Englishmen at all events, in
the sixty-seven volumes of the _Dictionary of National Biography_, where
are recorded the services rendered to religion, philosophy, poetry,
justice, and the empire by the "whelps" of many a country vicar.
Parsons' wives may sometimes be trying and hard to explain, but an
England without the sons of her clergy would be shorn of half her glory.

Marvell's boyhood seems to have been surrounded with the things that
most make for a child's happiness. A sensible, affectionate, humorous,
religious father, occupying a position of authority, and greatly
respected, a mother and three elder sisters to make much of his bright
wit and early adventures, a comfortable yet simple home, and an
atmosphere of piety, learning, and good fellowship. What more is wanted,
or can be desired? The "Boatswains" and "Cabin-boys" of Bishop Parker's
fancy were in the neighbourhood, no doubt, and as stray companions for a
half-holiday must have had their attractions; but it is unnecessary to
attribute Andrew Marvell's style in controversy to his early
acquaintance with a sea-faring population, for he is far more likely to
have picked it up from his great friend and colleague, the author of
_Paradise Lost_.

Marvell's school education over, he went up to Cambridge, not to his
father's old college, but to the more splendid foundation of Trinity.
About the date of his matriculation there is a doubt. In Wood's _Athenæ
Oxonienses_ there is a note to the effect that Marvell was admitted "in
matriculam Acad. Cant. Coll. Trin." on the 14th of December 1633, when
the boy was but twelve years old. Dr. Lort, a famous master of Trinity
in his day, writing in November 1765 to Captain Edward Thompson, of whom
more later on, told the captain that until 1635 there was no register of
admissions of ordinary students, or pensioners, as they are called, but
only a register of Fellows and Foundation Scholars, and in this
last-named register Marvell's name appears as a Scholar sworn and
admitted on the 13th of April 1638. As, however, Marvell took his B.A.
degree in 1639, he must have been in residence long before April 1638.
Probably Marvell went to Trinity about 1635, just before the register of
pensioners was begun, as a pensioner, becoming a Scholar in 1638, and
taking his degree in 1639.

Cambridge undergraduates do not usually keep diaries, nor after they
have become Masters of Art are they much in the habit of giving details
as to their academic career. Marvell is no exception to this provoking
rule. He nowhere tells us what his University taught him or how. The
logic of the schools he had no choice but to learn. Molineus, Peter
Ramus, Seton, Keckerman were text-books of reputation, from one or
another of which every Cambridge man had to master his _simpliciters_,
his _quids_, his _secundum quids_, his _quales_, and his _quantums_.
Aristotle's Physics, Ethics, and Politics were "tutor's books," and
those young men who loved to hear themselves talk were left free to
discuss, much to Hobbes's disgust, "the freedom of the will, incorporeal
substance, everlasting nows, ubiquities, hypostases, which the people
understand not nor will ever care for."

In the life of Matthew Robinson,[11:1] who went up to Cambridge a little
later than Marvell (June 1645), and was probably a harder reader, we are
told that "the strength of his studies lay in the metaphysics and in
those subtle authors for many years which rendered him an irrefragable
disputant _de quolibet ente_, and whilst he was but senior freshman he
was found in the bachelor schools, disputing ably with the best of the
senior sophisters." Robinson despised the old-fashioned Ethics and
Physics, but with the new Cartesian or Experimental Philosophy he was
_inter primos_. History, particularly the Roman, was in great favour at
both Universities at this time, and young men were taught, so old Hobbes
again grumbles, to despise monarchy "from Cicero, Seneca, Cato and other
politicians of Rome, and Aristotle of Athens, who seldom spake of kings
but as of wolves and other ravenous beasts."[12:1] The Muses were never
neglected at Cambridge, as the University exercises survive to prove,
whilst modern languages, Spanish and Italian for example, were greedily
acquired by such an eager spirit as Richard Crashaw, the poet, who came
into residence at Pembroke in 1631. There were problems to be "kept" in
the college chapel, lectures to be attended, both public and private,
declamations to be delivered, and even in the vacations the scholars
were not exempt from "exercises" either in hall or in their tutors'
rooms. Earnest students read their Greek Testaments, and even their
Hebrew Bibles, and filled their note-books, working more hours a day
than was good for their health, whilst the idle ones wasted their time
as best they could in an unhealthy, over-crowded town, in an age which
knew nothing of boating, billiards, or cricket. A tennis-court there was
in Marvell's time, for in Dr. Worthington's _Diary_, under date 3rd of
April 1637, it stands recorded that on that day and in that place that
learned man received "a dangerous blow on the Eye."[12:2]

The only incident we know of Marvell's undergraduate days is remarkable
enough, for, boy though he was, he seems, like the Gibbon of a later
day, to have suddenly become a Roman Catholic. This occurrence may serve
to remind us how, during Marvell's time at Trinity, the University of
Cambridge (ever the precursor in thought-movements) had a Catholic
revival of her own, akin to that one which two hundred years afterwards
happened at Oxford, and has left so much agreeable literature behind it.
Fuller in his history of the University of Cambridge tells us a little
about this highly interesting and important movement:--

   "Now began the University (1633-4) to be much beautified in
   buildings, every college either casting its skin with the snake, or
   renewing its bill with the eagle, having their courts or at least
   their fronts and Gatehouses repaired and adorned. But the greatest
   alteration was in their Chapels, most of them being graced with the
   accession of organs. And seeing musick is one of the liberal arts,
   how could it be quarrelled at in an University if they sang with
   understanding both of the matter and manner thereof. Yet some took
   great distaste thereat as attendancie to superstition."[13:1]

The chapel at Peterhouse, we read elsewhere, which was built in 1632,
and consecrated by Bishop White of Ely, had a beautiful ceiling and a
noble east window. "A grave divine," Fuller tells us, "preaching before
the University at St. Mary's, had this smart passage in his Sermon--that
as at the Olympian Games he was counted the Conqueror who could drive
his chariot wheels nearest the mark yet so as not to hinder his running
or to stick thereon, so he who in his Sermons could preach _near Popery_
and yet _no Popery_, _there was your man_. And indeed it now began to be
the general complaint of most moderate men that many in the University,
both in the schools and pulpits, approached the opinions of the Church
of Rome nearer than ever before."

Archbishop Laud, unlike the bishops of Dr. Newman's day, favoured the
Catholic revival, and when Mr. Bernard, the lecturer of St. Sepulchre's,
London, preached a "No Popery" sermon at St. Mary's, Cambridge, he was
dragged into the High Commission Court, and, as the hateful practice
then was, a practice dear to the soul of Laud, was bidden to subscribe a
formal recantation. This Mr. Bernard refused to do, though professing
his sincere sorrow and penitence for any oversights and hasty
expressions in his sermon. Thereupon he was sent back to prison, where
he died. "If," adds Fuller, "he was miserably abused in prison by the
keepers (as some have reported) to the shortening of his life, He that
maketh inquisition for blood either hath or will be a revenger
thereof."[14:1]

By the side of this grim story the much-written-about incidents of the
Oxford Movement seem trivial enough.

Not a few Cambridge scholars of this period, Richard Crashaw among the
number, found permanent refuge in Rome.

The story of Marvell's conversion is emphatic but vague in its details.
The "Jesuits," who were well represented in Cambridge at the time, are
said to have persuaded him to leave Cambridge secretly, and to take
refuge in one of their houses in London. Thither the elder Marvell
followed in pursuit, and after search came across his son in a
bookseller's shop, where he succeeded both in convincing the boy of his
errors and in persuading him to return to Trinity. An odd story, and
not, as it stands, very credible; but Mr. Grosart discovered among the
Marvell papers at Hull a fragment of a letter without signature,
address, or date, which throws some sort of light on the incident. This
letter was evidently, as Mr. Grosart surmises, sent to the elder Marvell
by some similarly afflicted parent. In its fragmentary state the letter
reads as follows:--

   "Worthy S^r,--M^r Breerecliffe being w^th me to-day, I related vnto
   him a fearfull passage lately at Cambridg touching a sonne of mine,
   Bachelor of Arts in Katherine Hall, w^ch was this. He was lately
   inuited to a supper in towne by a gentlewoman, where was one M^r
   Nichols a felow of Peterhouse, and another or two masters of arts, I
   know not directly whether felowes or not: my sonne hauing noe
   p'ferment, but liuing meerely of my penny, they pressed him much to
   come to liue at their house, and for chamber and extraordinary bookes
   they promised farre: and then earnestly moued him to goe to Somerset
   house, where they could doe much for p'ferring him to some eminent
   place, and in conclusion to popish arguments to seduce him soe rotten
   and vnsauory as being ouerheard it was brought in question before the
   heads of the Uniuersity: _Dr. Cosens_, being _Vice Chancelor_ noe
   punishment is inioined him: but on Ash-wednesday next a recantation
   in regent house of some popish tenets Nicols let fall: I p'ceive by
   M^r Breercliffe some such prank vsed towards y^r sonne: I desire to
   know what y^u did therin: thinking I cannot doe god better seruice
   then bring it vppon the stage either in Parliament if it hold: or
   informing some Lords of the Counsail to whom I stand much oblieged if
   a bill in Starchamber be meete To terrify others by making these some
   publique spectacle: for if such fearfull practises may goe vnpunished
   I take care whether I may send a child ... the lord."[15:1]

The reference to Dr. Cosens, or Cosin, being Vice-Chancellor gives a
clue to the date, for Cosin was chosen Vice-Chancellor on the 4th of
November 1639.[15:2]

Though we can know nothing of the elder Marvell's methods of
re-conversion, they were more successful than the elder Gibbon's, who,
as we know, packed the future historian off to Lausanne and a Swiss
pastor's house. What Gibbon became on leaving off his Romanism we can
guess for ourselves, whereas Marvell, once out of the hands of these
very shadowy "Jesuits," remained the staunchest of Christian Protestants
to the end of his days.

This strange incident, and two college exercises or poems, one in
Greek, the other in Latin, both having reference to an addition to the
Royal Family, and appearing in the _Musa Cantabrigiensis_ for 1637, are
all the materials that exist for weaving the story of Marvell, the
Cambridge undergraduate. The Latin verses, which are Horatian in style,
contain one pretty stanza, composed apparently before the sex of the
new-born infant was known at Cambridge.

    "Sive felici Carolum figurâ
    Parvulus princeps imitetur almae
    Sive Mariae decoret puellam
                      Dulcis imago."

After taking his Bachelor's degree in 1639, Marvell, being still a
Scholar of the college, must have gone away, for the Conclusion Book of
Trinity, under date September 24, 1641, records as follows:--

   "It is agreed by y^e Master and 8 seniors y^t M^r Carter and D^r
   Wakefields, D^r Marvell, D^r Waterhouse, and D^r Maye in regard y^t
   some of them are reported to be married and y^t others look not after
   y^eir days nor Acts shall receave no more benefitt of y^e Coll and
   shall be out of y^ier places unless y^ei shew just cause to y^e Coll
   for y^e contrary in 3 months."

Dr. Lort, in his amiable letter of 1765, already mentioned, points out
that this entry contains no reflection on Marvell's morals, but shows
that he was given "notice to quit" for non-residence, "then much more
strictly enjoined than it is now." The days referred to in the entry
were, so the master obligingly explains, "the certain number allowed by
statute to absentees," whilst the "acts mean the Exercises also enjoyned
by the statutes." Dr. Lort adds, "It does not appear, by any subsequent
entry, whether Marvell did or did not comply with this order." We may
now safely assume he did not. Marvell's Cambridge days were over.

The vacations, no inconsiderable part of the year, were probably spent
by Marvell under his father's roof at Hull, where his two elder sisters
were married and settled. It is not to be wondered at that Andrew
Marvell should, for so many years, have represented Hull in the House of
Commons, for both he and his family were well known in the town. The
elder Marvell added to his reputation as a teacher and preacher the
character of a devoted servant of his flock in the hour of danger. The
plague twice visited Hull during the time of the elder Marvell, first in
1635 and again in 1638. In those days men might well pray to be
delivered from "plague, pestilence, and famine." Hull suffered terribly
on both occasions. We have seen, in comparatively recent times, the
effect of the cholera upon large towns, and the plague was worse than
the cholera many times over. The Hull preacher, despite the stigma of
_facetiousness_, which still clings to him, stuck to his post, visiting
the sick, burying the dead, and even, which seems a little superfluous,
preaching and afterwards printing "by request" their funeral sermons. A
brave man, indeed, and one reserved for a tragic end.

In April 1638 the poet's mother died. In the following November the
elder Marvell married a widow lady, but his own end was close upon him.
The earliest consecutive account of this strange event is in Gent's
_History of Hull_ (1735):--"This year, 1640, the Rev. Mr. Andrew
Marvell, Lecturer of Hull, sailing over the Humber in company with
Madame Skinner of Thornton College and a young beautiful couple who were
going to be wedded; a speedy Fate prevented the designed happy union
thro' a violent storm which overset the boat and put a period to all
their lives, nor were there any remains of them or the vessel ever after
found, tho' earnestly sought for on distant shores."

Thus died by drowning a brave man, a good Christian, and an excellent
clergyman of the Reformed Church of England. The plain narrative just
quoted has been embroidered by many long-subsequent writers in the
interests of those who love presentiments and ghostly intimations of
impending events, and in one of these versions it is recorded, that
though the morning was clear, the breeze fair, and the company gay, yet
when stepping into the boat "the reverend man exclaimed, 'Ho for
Heaven,' and threw his staff ashore and left it to Providence to fulfil
its awful warning."

So melancholy an occurrence naturally excited great attention, and long
lingered in local memories. Everybody in Hull knew who was their
member's father.

There is an obstinate tradition quite unverifiable that Mrs. Skinner,
the mother of the beautiful young lady who was drowned with the elder
Marvell, adopted the young Marvell as a son, sending to Cambridge for
him after his father's death, and providing him with the means of
travel, and that afterwards she bequeathed him her estate. Whether there
is any truth in this story cannot now be ascertained. The Skinners were
a well-known Hull family, one of them, a brother of that Cyriac Skinner
who was urged by Milton in immortal verse to enjoy himself whilst the
mood was on him, having been Mayor of Hull. The lady, doubtless, had
money, and Andrew Marvell was in need of money, and appears to have been
supplied with it. It is quite possible the tradition is true.


FOOTNOTES:

[6:1] Fuller's _Worthies_ (1662), p. 159.

[8:1] "The Fuller Worthies Library," 4 vols., 1872. Hereafter referred
to as _Grosart_.

[8:2] _Mr. Smirke or the Divine in Mode._--Grosart, iv. 15.

[11:1] _Autobiography of Matthew Robinson_. Edited by J.E.B. Mayor,
Cambridge, 1856.

[12:1] _Behemoth_, Hobbes' Works (Molesworth), vol. vi., see pp. 168,
218, 233-6.

[12:2] Worthington's _Diary_, vol. i. p. 5 (Chetham Society).

[13:1] Fuller, _History of Cambridge University_ (1655), p. 167.

[14:1] Fuller, p. 166.

[15:1] Grosart, I., xxviii.

[15:2] See Worthington's _Diary_, vol. i. p. 7.




CHAPTER II

"THE HAPPY GARDEN-STATE"


The seventeenth century was the century of travel for educated
Englishmen--of long, leisurely travel. Milton's famous Italian tour
lasted fifteen months. John Evelyn's _Wander-Jahre_ occupied four years.
Andrew Marvell lived abroad in France, Spain, Holland, and Italy from
1642 to 1646, and we have Milton's word for it that when the traveller
returned he was well acquainted with the French, Dutch, Spanish, and
Italian languages. Andrew Marvell was a highly cultivated man, living in
a highly cultivated age, in daily converse with scholars, poets,
philosophers, and men of very considerable scientific attainments. In
reading Clarendon and Burnet, and whilst turning over Aubrey's
delightful gossip, it is impossible not to be struck with the width and
variety of the learning as well as with the wit of the period.
Intellectually it was a great age.

No record remains of Marvell's travels during these years. Up and down
his writings the careful reader will come across pleasant references to
foreign manners and customs, betokening the keen humorous observer, and
the possession of that wide-eyed faculty that takes a pleasure, half
contemplative, half the result of animal spirits, in watching the way of
the world wherever you may chance to be. Of another and an earlier
traveller, Sir Henry Wotton, we read in "Walton's _Life_."

   "And whereas he was noted in his youth to have a sharp wit and apt to
   jest, _that_ by time, travel, and conversation was so polished and
   made useful, that his company seemed to be one of the delights of
   mankind."

In all Marvell's work, as poet, as Parliamentarian, as controversialist,
we shall see the travelled man. Certainly no one ever more fully grasped
the sense of the famous sentence given by Wotton to Milton, when the
latter was starting on his travels: "_I pensieri stretti ed il viso
sciolto._"

Marvell was in Rome about 1645. I can give no other date during the
whole four years. This, our only date, rests upon an assumption. In
Marvell's earliest satirical poem he gives an account of a visit he paid
in Rome to the unlucky poetaster Flecknoe, who was not in Rome until
1645. If, therefore, the poem records an actual visit, it follows that
the author of the poem was in Rome at the same time. It is not very
near, but it is as near as we can get.

Richard Flecknoe was an Irish priest of blameless life, with a passion
for scribbling and for printing. His exquisite reason for both these
superfluous acts is worth quoting:--

   "I write chiefly to avoid idleness, and print to avoid the imputation
   (of idleness), and as others do it to live after they are dead, I do
   it only not to be thought dead whilst I am alive."[20:1]

Such frankness should have disarmed ridicule, but somehow or another
this amiable man came to be regarded as the type of a dull author, and
his name passed into a proverb for stupidity, so much so that when
Dryden in 1682 was casting about how best to give pain to Shadwell, he
devised the plan of his famous satire, "MacFlecknoe," where in biting
verse he describes Flecknoe (who was happily dead) as an aged Prince--

                       "Who like Augustus young
    Was called to empire and had governed long;
    In prose and verse was owned, without dispute,
    Through all the realms of nonsense absolute."

Dryden goes on to picture the aged Flecknoe,

      "pondering which of all his sons was fit
    To reign and wage immortal war with Wit,"

and fixing on Shadwell.

    "Shadwell alone my perfect image bears,
    Mature in dulness from his tender years;
    Shadwell alone, of all my sons, is he
    Who stands confirmed in full stupidity:
    The rest to some faint meaning make pretence,
    But Shadwell never deviates into sense."

Thus has it come about that Flecknoe, the Irish priest, whom Marvell
visited in his Roman garret in 1645, bears a name ever memorable in
literature.

Marvell's own poem, though eclipsed by the splendour of Glorious John's
resounding lines, has an interest of its own as being, in its roughly
humorous way, a forerunner of the "Dunciad" and "Grub Street"
literature, by which in sundry moods 'tis "pleasure to be bound." It
describes seeking out the poetaster in his lodging "three staircases
high," at the sign of the Pelican, in a room so small that it seemed "a
coffin set in the stair's head." No sooner was the rhymer unearthed than
straightway he began to recite his poetry in dismal tones, much to his
visitor's dismay:--

    "But I who now imagin'd myself brought
    To my last trial, in a serious thought
    Calm'd the disorders of my youthful breast
    And to my martyrdom preparèd rest.
    Only this frail ambition did remain,
    The last distemper of the sober brain,
    That there had been some present to assure
    The future ages how I did endure."

To stop the cataract of "hideous verse," Marvell invited the scarecrow
to dinner, and waits while he dresses. As they turn to leave, for the
room is so small that the man who comes in last must be the first to go
out, they meet a friend of the poet on the stairs, who makes a third at
dinner. After dinner Flecknoe produces ten quires of paper, from which
the friend proceeds to read, but so infamously as to excite their
author's rage:--

    "But all his praises could not now appease
    The provok't Author, whom it did displease
    To hear his verses by so just a curse
    That were ill made, condemned to be read worse:
    And how (impossible!) he made yet more
    Absurdities in them than were before:
    For his untun'd voice did fall or raise
    As a deaf man upon the Viol plays,
    Making the half-points and the periods run
    Confus'der than the atoms in the sun:
    Thereat the poet swell'd with anger full,"

and after violent exclamations retires in dudgeon back to his room. The
faithful friend is in despair. What is he to do to make peace? "Who
would commend his mistress now?" Marvell

                "counselled him to go in time
    Ere the fierce poet's anger turned to rhyme."

The advice was taken, and Marvell, finding himself at last free from
boredom, went off to St. Peter's to return thanks.

This poem is but an unsatisfactory _souvenir de voyage_, but it is all
there is.

What Marvell was doing during the stirring years 1646-1650 is not
known. Even in the most troubled times men go about their business, and
our poet was always a man of affairs. As for his opinions during these
years, we can only guess at them from those to which he afterwards gave
expression. Marvell was neither a Republican nor a Puritan. Like his
father before him, he was a Protestant and a member of the Reformed
Church of England. He stood for both King and Parliament. Archbishop
Laud he distrusted, and it may well be detested, but good churchmen have
often distrusted and even detested their archbishops. Mr. Gladstone had
no great regard for Archbishop Tait. Before the Act of Uniformity and
the repressive legislation that followed upon its heels had driven
English dissent into its final moulds, it was not doctrine but
ceremonies that disturbed men's minds; and Marvell belonged to that
school of English churchmen, by no means the least distinguished school,
which was not disposed to quarrel with their fellow-Christians over
white surplices, the ring in matrimony, or the attitude during Holy
Communion. He shared the belief of a contemporary that no system is bad
enough to destroy a good man, or good enough to save a bad one.

The Civil War was to Marvell what it was to most wise men not devoured
by faction--a deplorable event. Twenty years after he wrote in the
_Rehearsal Transprosed_:--

   "Whether it be a war of religion or of liberty it is not worth the
   labour to inquire. Whichsoever was at the top, the other was at the
   bottom; but upon considering all, I think the cause was too good to
   have been fought for. Men ought to have trusted God--they ought to
   have trusted the King with that whole matter. The arms of the Church
   are prayers and tears, the arms of the subject are patience and
   petitions. The King himself being of so accurate and piercing a
   judgment would soon have felt it where it stuck. For men may spare
   their pains when Nature is at work, and the world will not go the
   faster for our driving. Even as his present Majesty's happy
   Restoration did itself, so all things else happen in their best and
   proper time, without any heed of our officiousness."[24:1]

In the face of this passage and many another of the like spirit, it is
puzzling to find such a man, for example, as Thomas Baker, the ejected
non-juring Fellow and historian of St. John's College, Cambridge
(1656-1740), writing of Marvell as "that bitter republican"; and Dryden,
who probably knew Marvell, comparing his controversial pamphlets with
those of Martin Marprelate, or at all events speaking of Martin
Marprelate as "the Marvell of those times."[24:2] A somewhat
anti-prelatical note runs through Marvell's writings, but it is a
familiar enough note in the works of the English laity, and by no means
dissevers its possessor from the Anglican Church. But there are some
heated expressions in the satires which probably gave rise to the belief
that Marvell was a Republican.[24:3]

During the Commonwealth Marvell was content to be a civil servant. He
entertained for the Lord-Protector the same kind of admiration that such
a loyalist as Chateaubriand could not help feeling for Napoleon. Even
Clarendon's pedantic soul occasionally vibrates as he writes of Oliver,
and compares his reputation in foreign courts with that of his own
royal master. When the Restoration came Marvell rejoiced. Two
old-established things had been destroyed by Cromwell--Kings and
Parliaments, and Marvell was glad to see them both back again in
England.

Some verses of Marvell's attributable to this period (1646-1650) show
him keeping what may be called Royalist company. With a dozen other
friends of Richard Lovelace, the Cavalier poet and the author of two of
the most famous stanzas in English verse, Marvell contributed some
commendatory lines addressed to his "noble friend, Mr. Richard Lovelace,
upon his Poems," which appeared with the poems themselves in that year
of fate, 1649. "After the murder of the King," says Anthony Wood,
"Lovelace was set at liberty, and having by that time consumed all his
estate, grew very melancholy, became very poor in body and purse, was
the object of charity, went in ragged clothes (whereas when he was in
glory he wore cloth of gold and silver), and mostly lodged in obscure
and dirty places, more befitting the worst of beggars and poorest of
servants."

Then it was that _Lucasta_ made its first appearance. When the fortunes
of the gallant poet were at their lowest and never to revive, Marvell
seizes the occasion to deplore the degeneracy of the times, a familiar
theme with poets:--

    "Our civil wars have lost the civic crown,
    He highest builds who with most art destroys,
    And against others' fame his own employs."

He then glances scornfully at the new Presbyterian censorship of the
press:--

    "The barbèd censurers begin to look
    Like the grim consistory on thy book,
    And on each line cast a reforming eye,"

and suggests that _Lucasta_ is in danger because in 1642 its author had
been imprisoned by order of the House of Commons for presenting a
petition from Kent which prayed for the restoration of the Book of
Common Prayer. This danger is, however, overcome by the ladies, who rise
in arms to defend their favourite poet.

    "But when the beauteous Ladies came to know
    That their dear Lovelace was endangered so,
    Lovelace that thaw'd the most congealèd breast,
    He who lov'd best and them defended best,
    They all in mutiny, though yet undrest,
    Sally'd."

One of them challenged Marvell as to whether he had not been of the
poet's traducers, but he answered No!

    "O No, mistake not, I reply'd, for I
    In your defence or in his cause would die.
    But he, secure of glory and of time,
    Above their envy or my aid doth climb.
    Him, bravest men and fairest nymphs approve,
    His book in them finds Judgment, with you, Love."

Lovelace did not live to see the Restoration, but died in a mean lodging
near Shoe Lane in April 1658, and was buried in St. Bridget's Church.
Let us indulge the hope that the friends who occupied so many of the
introductory pages of Lovelace's _Lucasta_ occasionally enlivened the
solitude and relieved the distress of the poet whose praises they had
once sung with so much vigour. As Marvell was undoubtedly a friendly
man, and one who loved to be alone with his friends, and had never any
house of his own to keep up, living for the most part in hired lodgings,
it would be unkind to doubt that he at least did not forget Lovelace in
his poverty and depression of spirit.

In 1649 thirty-three poets combined to weep over the early grave of the
Lord Henry Hastings, the eldest son of the sixth Earl of Huntingdon, who
died of the smallpox in the twentieth year of his age. Not even this
plentiful discharge of poets' tears should rob the young nobleman of his
claim to be regarded as a fine example of the great learning,
accomplishments, and high spirits of the age. We can still produce the
thirty-three poets, but what young nobleman is there who can boast such
erudition as had rewarded the scorned delights and the laborious days of
this Lord Hastings? We have at least the satisfaction of knowing that
did such a one exist he probably would not die of the smallpox. Among
the poets who wept on this occasion were Herrick, Sir John Denham,
Andrew Marvell, and John Dryden, then a Westminster schoolboy, whose
description of the smallpox is as bad as the disease.

Marvell's verses begin very prettily and soon introduce a characteristic
touch:--

    "Go, stand betwixt the Morning and the Flowers,
    And ere they fall arrest the early showers,
    Hastings is dead; and we disconsolate
    With early tears must mourn his early fate."

In 1650 Marvell, then in his twenty-ninth year, went to live with Lord
Fairfax at Nunappleton House in Yorkshire, as tutor to the only child
and daughter of the house, Mary Fairfax, aged twelve years (born 30th
July 1638). This proved to be a great event in Marvell's life as a poet,
and it happened at an epoch in the distinguished career of the famous
Parliamentarian general

    "Whose name in arms through Europe rings."

Lord Fairfax, though he had countenanced, if not approved, the trial
and deposition of the king, had resolutely held himself aloof from the
proceedings which, beginning on Saturday the 20th of January 1649,
terminated so dismally on Tuesday the 30th. The strange part played by
Lady Fairfax on the first day of the so-called trial (though it was no
greater a travesty of justice than many a real trial both before and
after) is one of the best-known stories in English history. There are
several versions of it. Having provided herself with a seat in a small
gallery in Westminster Hall, just above the heads of the judges, when
her husband's name was called out as one of the commissioners, the
intrepid lady (no Cavalier's dame, be it remembered, but a true blue
Presbyterian), a brave soldier's daughter, cried out, "Lord Fairfax is
not here; he will never sit among you. You do wrong to name him as a
sitting Commissioner." This is Rushworth's version, and he was present.
Clarendon, who was not present, being abroad at the time, reports the
words as, "He has more wit than to be here."

Later on in the day, when the President Bradshaw interrupted the king
and peremptorily bade him to answer the charges exhibited against him
"in the name of the Commons of England assembled, and of the people of
England," Lady Fairfax again rose to her feet and exclaimed, "It's a
lie! Not half the people. Where are they and their consents? Oliver
Cromwell is a traitor."

Lieutenant-Colonel Axtell, who during the trial was in command of a
regiment in Westminster and charged by his military superior, Lord
Fairfax himself, with the duty of maintaining order, hearing this
disturbance, went forward and told Lady Fairfax to hold her tongue,
sound advice which she appears to have taken. After the Restoration
Axtell was put to his trial as a "regicide." His defence, which was,
that as a soldier he obeyed his orders, and was no more guilty than his
general, Lord Fairfax, was not listened to, and he was sentenced to
death, a fate which he met like the brave man he was.

Although Fairfax did not immediately resign his command after the king's
death, from that moment he lost heart in the cause. Lady Fairfax, whose
loyalty to Charles may have been quickened by her dislike of Oliver, had
great influence with him, and it may well be that his conscience pricked
him. The rupture came in June 1650, when Charles's son made his
appearance in Scotland and his peace with the Presbyterians, subscribing
with inward emotions it would be unkind to attempt to describe the
Solemn League and Covenant, and attending services and listening to
sermons the length of which, at least, he never forgot. War was plainly
imminent between the two countries. The question was, who should begin?
Cromwell, who had hurried home from Ireland, Lambert, and Harrison were
all keen to strike the first blow. Fairfax felt a scruple, and in those
days scruples counted. Was there, he asked, a just cause for an invasion
of Scotland? A committee was appointed, consisting of the three warriors
above-named with St. John and Whitelock, to confer with the Lord-General
and satisfy him of the lawfulness of the undertaking. The six met, and
having first prayed--Oliver praying first--they proceeded to a
discussion which may be read at length in Whitelock's _Memorials_, vol.
iii. p. 207. The substance of their talk was as follows: Fairfax's
scruple proved to be that both they and the Scots had joined in the
Solemn League and Covenant, and that, therefore, until Scotland assumed
the offensive, there was no cause for an invasion. Cromwell's retort,
after a preliminary quibble, was practical enough. "War is inevitable.
Is it better to have it in the bowels of another's country or in one's
own? In one or other it must be." Fairfax's scruple, however, withstood
this battery, though it was strongly enforced by Harrison, who, in reply
to the Lord-General's question, "What was the warrant for the assumption
that Scotland meant to fall upon England?" inquired, if Scotland did not
mean to invade England, for whose benefit were levies being made and
soldiers enlisted.

Fairfax proved immovable. "Every man," said he, "must stand or fall by
his own conscience"; and as he offered to lay down his command, there
was nothing for it but to accept the resignation and appoint his
successor. This was speedily done, and on the 28th of June 1650 "Oliver
Cromwell, Esquire," was appointed Captain-General and Commander-in-chief
of all the forces. On 16th July Cromwell crossed the Tweed, and on the
3rd of September the Lord delivered Leslie into his hands at Dunbar.

It was in these circumstances that Lord Fairfax and his energetic lady
and only child went back to their Yorkshire home in the midsummer of
1650, taking Marvell with them to instruct the Lady Mary in the tongues.

Nunappleton House is in the Ainstey of York, a pleasant bit of country
bounded by the rivers Ouse, Wharfe, and Nidd. The modern traveller, as
his train rushes north, whilst shut up in his corridor-carriage with his
rug, his pipe, and his novel, passes at no great distance from the house
on the way between Selby and York. The old house, as it was in Marvell's
time, is thus described by Captain Markham, who had a print to help
him, in his delightful _Life of the Great Lord Fairfax_:--

   "It was a picturesque brick mansion with stone copings and a high
   steep roof, and consisted of a centre and two wings at right angles,
   forming three sides of a square, facing to the north. The great hall
   or gallery occupied the centre between the two wings. It was fifty
   yards long, and was adorned with thirty shields in wood, painted with
   the arms of the family. In the three rooms there were chimney-pieces
   of delicate marble of various colours, and many fine portraits on the
   walls. The central part of the house was surrounded by a cupola, and
   clustering chimneys rose in the two wings. A noble park with splendid
   oak-trees, and containing 300 head of deer, stretched away to the
   north, while on the south side were the ruins of the old Nunnery, the
   flower-garden, and the low meadows called _ings_ extending to the
   banks of the Wharfe. In this flower-garden the General took especial
   delight. The flowers were planted in masses, tulips, pinks, and
   roses, each in separate beds, which were cut into the shape of forts
   with five bastions. General Lambert, whom Fairfax had reared as a
   soldier, also loved his flowers, and excelled both in cultivating
   them and in painting them from Nature. Lord Fairfax only went to
   Denton, the favourite seat of his grandfather, when the floods were
   out over the _ings_ at Nunappleton, and he also occasionally resorted
   to his house at Bishop Hill in York."[31:1]

In this garden the muse of Andrew Marvell blossomed like the
cherry-tree.

Lord Fairfax, though furious in war, and badly wounded in many a fierce
engagement, was, when otherwise occupied, a man of quiet literary
tastes, and a good bit of a collector and _virtuoso_. Some of the rare
books and manuscripts he had around him at Nunappleton are now in the
Bodleian, the treasures of which he had protected in troubled times. He
loved to handle medals and coins, and knew the points of old
engravings. He wrote a history of the Christian Church down to our own
ill-conducted Reformation, and composed a complete metrical version of
the Psalms of David and of the Song of Solomon. These and many other
productions, which he characterised as "The Employment of my Solitude,"
still remain in his own handwriting. Amongst them, Yorkshire men will
hear with pleasure, is a "Treatise on the breeding of the Horse."

Of the quality of his wife we have already had a touch. She was one of
the four daughters of Lord Vere of Tilbury, who came of a fine fighting
family, and whose daughters had a roughish bringing-up, chiefly in the
Netherlands. None of the daughters were reckoned beautiful, either in
face or figure, and it may well be that Lady Fairfax had something about
her of the old campaigner; but of her courage, sincerity, and goodness
there can be no question. Her loyalty was no sickly fruit of "Church
Principles," for her strong intelligence rejected scornfully the slavish
doctrines, alien to our political constitution, of divine right and
passive obedience; but a loyalty, none the less, it was, of a very
valuable kind. She was fond of argument, and with Lady Fairfax at
Nunappleton there was never likely to be any dearth of sensible talk and
lively reminiscence. The tragedy of the 30th of January could never be
forgotten, and it is possible that Marvell's most famous verses, so
nobly descriptive of the demeanour of the king on that memorable
occasion, derived their inspiration from discourse at Nunappleton.

Of the Lady Mary, aged twelve, we have no direct testimony. When she
grew up and had her portrait painted she stands revealed as a stout
young woman with a plain good-natured face. The poor soul needed all
the good-nature heaven had bestowed upon her, for she had to bear the
misery and disgrace which were the inevitable marriage-portion of the
woman whose ill-luck it was to become the wife of George Villiers,
second Duke of Buckingham. Somebody seems to have taught her philosophy,
for she bore her misfortunes as best became a great lady, living as one
who had sorrow but no grievance. The duke died in 1688; she lived on
till 1704. She was ever a good friend to another ill-used solitary wife,
Catherine of Braganza. Marvell had every reason to be proud of his
pupil.

Beside the actual inmates of the great house, the whole countryside
swarmed with Fairfaxes. At the Rectory of Bolton Percy was the late
Lord-General's uncle, Henry Fairfax, and his two sons, Henry, who
succeeded to the title, and the better-known Brian, the biographer of
the Duke of Buckingham. At Stenton, four miles off, lived the widow of
the gallant Sir William Fairfax, who died, covered with wounds, in 1644
before Montgomery Castle. There were two sons and two daughters at
Stenton, whilst Charles Fairfax, another uncle, and the lawyer and
genealogist of the family, lived at no great distance with no less than
fourteen children. There were also sisters of Lord Fairfax, with
families of their own, all settled in the same part of the county.

Such were the agreeable surroundings of our poet for two years,
1650-1652. I must leave it to the imaginations of my readers to fill up
the picture, for excepting the poems, which we may safely assume were
written at Nunappleton House, and--who can doubt it?--read aloud to its
inmates, there is nothing more to be said.

Before considering the Nunappleton poetry, a word must be got in of
bibliography. College exercises and complimentary verses excepted,
Marvell printed none of his verse under his own name in his lifetime. So
far as his themes were political there is no need to wonder at this.
Indeed, the wonder is how, despite their anonymity, their author kept
his ears; but why the Nunappleton verse should have remained in
manuscript for more than thirty years is hard to explain.

Until Pope took his muse to market, poetry, apart from the drama, had no
direct commercial value, or one too small to be ranked as a motive for
publication. None the less, the age loved distinction and appreciated
wit, and to be known as a poet whose verses "numbered good intellects"
was to gain the _entrée_ to the society of men both of intellect and
fashion, and also, not infrequently, snug berths in the public service,
and secretaryships to foreign missions and embassies. Thus there was
always, in addition to natural vanity, a strong motive for a
seventeenth-century poet to publish his poems. To-day one would hesitate
to recommend a young man who wanted to get on in the world to publish a
volume of verse; but the age of "wit" and "parts" is over.

It was not till 1681--three years after Marvell's death--that the small
folio appeared with a fine portrait, still dear to the collector, which
contains for the first time what may be called the "garden-poetry" of
our author, together with some specimens of his political and satirical
versification.

Marvell's most famous poem--_The Ode upon Cromwell's Return from
Ireland_--is not included in the 1681 volume, and remained in manuscript
until 1776, as also did the poem upon Cromwell's death.

The remainder of the political poems, which had made their first
appearance as broadsheets, were reprinted after the Revolution in the
well-known _Collection of Poems on Affairs of State_.[35:1] These verses
were never owned by Marvell, and it is probable that some of them,
though attributed to him, are not his at all. We have only tradition to
go by. In the case of political satires, squibs, epigrams, rough popular
occasional rhymes flung off both in haste and heat to be sold with old
ballads in the market-place, we need not seek for better evidence than
tradition, which indeed is often the only external evidence we have for
the authorship of much more important things.

Now to return to the Nunappleton poetry.

In a poem of 776 lines Marvell tells the story and describes the charms
of the house which Lord Fairfax built for himself during the war, and to
which, as just narrated, he retired in the summer of 1650. The story is
only too familiar a one, being writ large over many a fine property.
Appleton House was Church loot. In the time of Henry, "the majestic lord
that burst the bonds of Rome," the old house at Nunappleton was a
Cistercian nunnery, a religious house. In 1542 the community was
suppressed and its property appropriated by the great-grandfather of the
Lord-General--one Sir Thomas Fairfax. The religious buildings were
pulled down and a new secular house rose in their place. In these bare
and sordid facts there is not much room for poetry, but there is a story
thrown in. Shortly before 1518 a Yorkshire heiress, bearing the
unromantic name of Isabella Thwaites, was living in the Cistercian
abbey, under the guardianship of the abbess, the Lady Anna Langton.
Property under the care of the Church is always supposed to be in
danger, and the Lady Anna was freely credited with the desire to make a
nun of her ward, and so keep her broad acres in Wharfedale and her
messuages in York for the use of Mother Church. None the less, the young
lady was allowed to go about and visit her neighbours, and whilst so
doing she fell in love with Sir William Fairfax, or he fell in love with
her or with her estates. Thereupon, so the story proceeds, the abbess
kept her ward a close prisoner within the nunnery walls. Legal
proceedings were taken, but in the end the privacy of the nunnery was
invaded, and Miss Thwaites was abducted and married to Sir William
Fairfax at the church of Bolton Percy. The lady abbess had to submit to
_vis major_, but worse days were in front of her, for she lived on to
see the nunnery itself despoiled, and the fair domains she had during a
long life preserved and maintained for religious uses handed over to the
son of her former ward, Isabella Thwaites.

"Paper Queen" Zhang Yin, 53, is the founder and chairwoman of Nine Dragons Paper, China's largest containerboard producer. Zhang ranks as the wealthiest woman in the world, with an estimated personal fortune of 38 billion yuan ($5.6 billion).


European scholars observed in the 19th century that Hindu women are "naturally chaste" and "more virtuous" than other women.[27] During the British Raj, many reformers such as Ram Mohan Roy, Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar, Jyotirao Phule, etc., fought for the betterment of women. Peary Charan Sarkar, a former student of Hindu College, Calcutta and a member of "Young Bengal", set up the first free school for girls in India in 1847 in Barasat, a suburb of Calcutta (later the school was named Kalikrishna Girls' High School).
While this might suggest that there was no positive British contribution during the Raj era, that is not entirely the case. Missionaries' wives such as Martha Mault née Mead and her daughter Eliza Caldwell née Mault are rightly remembered for pioneering the education and training of girls in south India. This practise initially met with local resistance, as it flew in the face of tradition. Raja Rammohan Roy's efforts led to the abolition of Sati under Governor-General William Cavendish-Bentinck in 1829. Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar's crusade for improvement in the situation of widows led to the Widow Remarriage Act of 1856. Many women reformers such as Pandita Ramabai also helped the cause of women.
Kittur Chennamma, queen of the princely state Kittur in Karnataka[citation needed], led an armed rebellion against the British in response to the Doctrine of lapse. Abbakka Rani, queen of coastal Karnataka, led the defence against invading European armies, notably the Portuguese in the 16th century. Rani Lakshmi Bai, the Queen of Jhansi, led the Indian Rebellion of 1857 against the British. She is now widely considered as a national hero. Begum Hazrat Mahal, the co-ruler of Awadh, was another ruler who led the revolt of 1857. She refused deals with the British and later retreated to Nepal. The Begums of Bhopal were also considered notable female rulers during this period. They did not observe purdah and were trained in martial arts.
Chandramukhi Basu, Kadambini Ganguly and Anandi Gopal Joshi were some of the earliest Indian women to obtain a degree.
In 1917, the first women's delegation met the Secretary of State to demand women's political rights, supported by the Indian National Congress. The All India Women's Education Conference was held in Pune in 1927[citation needed]. In 1929, through the efforts of Mahomed Ali Jinnah, the Child Marriage Restraint Act was passed, stipulating fourteen as the minimum age of marriage for a girl.[22][28] Though Mahatma Gandhi himself married at the age of thirteen, he later urged people to boycott child marriages and called upon young men to marry child widows.[29]
Women played an important part in India's independence struggle. Some famous freedom fighters include Bhikaji Cama, Dr. Annie Besant, Pritilata Waddedar, Vijayalakshmi Pandit, Rajkumari Amrit Kaur, Aruna Asaf Ali, Sucheta Kriplani and Kasturba Gandhi. Other notable names include Muthulakshmi Reddy and Durgabai Deshmukh. The Rani of Jhansi Regiment of Subhas Chandra Bose's Indian National Army consisted entirely of women, including Captain Lakshmi Sahgal. Sarojini Naidu, a poet and freedom fighter, was the first Indian woman to become President of the Indian National Congress and the first woman to become the governor of a state in India.

Our poet begins by referring to the modest dimensions of the house, and
the natural charms of its surroundings:--

    "The house was built upon the place,
    Only as for a mark of grace,
    And for an inn to entertain
    Its Lord awhile, but not remain.
    Him Bishop's-hill or Denton may,
    Or Billborow, better hold than they:
    But Nature here hath been so free,
    As if she said, 'Leave this to me.'
    Art would more neatly have defac'd
    What she had laid so sweetly waste
    In fragrant gardens, shady woods,
    Deep meadows, and transparent floods."

And then starts the story:--

    "While, with slow eyes, we these survey,
    And on each pleasant footstep stay,
    We opportunely may relate
    The progress of this house's fate.
    A nunnery first gave it birth,
    (For virgin buildings oft brought forth)
    And all that neighbour-ruin shows
    The quarries whence this dwelling rose.
    Near to this gloomy cloister's gates,
    There dwelt the blooming virgin Thwaites,
    Fair beyond measure, and an heir,
    Which might deformity make fair;
    And oft she spent the summer's suns
    Discoursing with the subtle Nuns,
    Whence, in these words, one to her weav'd,
    As 'twere by chance, thoughts long conceiv'd:
    'Within this holy leisure, we
    Live innocently, as you see.
    These walls restrain the world without,
    But hedge our liberty about;
    These bars inclose that wilder den
    Of those wild creatures, callèd men,
    The cloister outward shuts its gates,
    And, from us, locks on them the grates.
    Here we, in shining armour white,
    Like virgin amazons do fight,
    And our chaste lamps we hourly trim,
    Lest the great Bridegroom find them dim.
    Our orient breaths perfumèd are
    With incense of incessant prayer;
    And holy-water of our tears
    Most strangely our complexion clears;
    Not tears of grief, but such as those
    With which calm pleasure overflows;
    Or pity, when we look on you
    That live without this happy vow.
    How should we grieve that must be seen
    Each one a spouse, and each a queen,
    And can in heaven hence behold
    Our brighter robes and crowns of gold!
    When we have prayèd all our beads,
    Some one the holy Legend reads,
    While all the rest with needles paint
    The face and graces of the Saint;
    Some of your features, as we sewed,
    Through every shrine should be bestowed,
    And in one beauty we would take
    Enough a thousand Saints to make.
    And (for I dare not quench the fire
    That me does for your good inspire)
    'Twere sacrilege a man to admit
    To holy things for heaven fit.
    I see the angels in a crown
    On you the lilies showering down;
    And round about you glory breaks,
    That something more than human speaks.
    All beauty when at such a height,
    Is so already consecrate.
    Fairfax I know, and long ere this
    Have marked the youth, and what he is;
    But can he such a rival seem,
    For whom you heaven should disesteem?
    Ah, no! and 'twould more honour prove
    He your devoto were than Love.
    Here live belovèd and obeyed,
    Each one your sister, each your maid,
    And, if our rule seem strictly penned,
    The rule itself to you shall bend.
    Our Abbess, too, now far in age,
    Doth your succession near presage.
    How soft the yoke on us would lie,
    Might such fair hands as yours it tie!
    Your voice, the sweetest of the choir,
    Shall draw heaven nearer, raise us higher,
    And your example, if our head,
    Will soon us to perfection lead.
    Those virtues to us all so dear,
    Will straight grow sanctity when here;
    And that, once sprung, increase so fast,
    Till miracles it work at last.'"

What reply was given by the heiress to these arguments, and others of a
still more seductive hue, the poet does not tell, but turns to the eager
lover who asks, What should he do? He hints that a nunnery is no place
for a virtuous maid, and that the nuns (unlike himself, I hope) are only
thinking of her property. He complains that though the Court has
authorised him to use either peace or force, the nuns still stand upon
their guard.

    "Ill-counselled women, do you know
    Whom you resist or what you do?"

Using a most remarkable poetic licence, the poet refers to the fact that
this barred-out lover is to be the progenitor of the great Lord Fairfax.

    "Is not this he, whose offspring fierce
    Shall fight through all the universe;
    And with successive valour try
    France, Poland, either Germany,
    Till one, as long since prophesied,
    His horse through conquered Britain ride?"

The lover determines to take the place by assault. It was not a very
heroic enterprise, as Marvell describes it.

    "Some to the breach, against their foes,
    Their wooden Saints in vain oppose;
    Another bolder, stands at push,
    With their old holy-water brush,
    While the disjointed Abbess threads
    The jingling chain-shot of her beads;
    But their loud'st cannon were their lungs,
    And sharpest weapons were their tongues.
    But waving these aside like flies,
    Young Fairfax through the wall does rise.
    Then the unfrequented vault appeared,
    And superstition, vainly feared;
    The relicks false were set to view;
    Only the jewels there were true,
    And truly bright and holy Thwaites,
    That weeping at the altar waits.
    But the glad youth away her bears,
    And to the Nuns bequeathes her tears,
    Who guiltily their prize bemoan,
    Like gypsies who a child have stol'n."

The poet then goes on to glorify the results of this union and to
describe happy days spent at Nunappleton by the descendants of Isabella
Thwaites.

    "At the demolishing, this seat
    To Fairfax fell, as by escheat;
    And what both nuns and founders willed,
    'Tis likely better thus fulfilled.
    For if the virgin proved not theirs,
    The cloister yet remainèd hers;
    Though many a nun there made her vow,
    'Twas no religious house till now.
    From that blest bed the hero came
    Whom France and Poland yet does fame;
    Who, when retirèd here to peace,
    His warlike studies could not cease;
    But laid these gardens out, in sport,
    In the just figure of a fort,
    And with five bastions it did fence,
    As aiming one for every sense.
    When in the east the morning ray
    Hangs out the colours of the day,
    The bee through these known alleys hums,
    Beating the dian with its drums.
    Then flowers their drowsy eyelids raise,
    Their silken ensigns each displays,
    And dries its pan, yet dank with dew,
    And fills its flask with odours new.
    These as their Governor goes by
    In fragrant volleys they let fly,
    And to salute their Governess
    Again as great a charge they press:
    None for the virgin nymph; for she
    Seems with the flowers a flower to be.
    And think so still! though not compare
    With breath so sweet, or cheek so fair!
    Well shot, ye firemen! Oh, how sweet
    And round your equal fires do meet,
    Whose shrill report no ear can tell,
    But echoes to the eye and smell!
    See how the flowers, as at parade,
    Under their colours stand displayed;
    Each regiment in order grows,
    That of the tulip, pink and rose.
    But when the vigilant patrol
    Of stars walk round about the pole,
    Their leaves, which to the stalks are curled,
    Seem to their staves the ensigns furled.
    Then in some flower's belovèd hut,
    Each bee, as sentinel, is shut,
    And sleeps so too, but, if once stirred,
    She runs you through, nor asks the word.

    Oh, thou, that dear and happy isle,
    The garden of the world erewhile,
    Thou Paradise of the four seas,
    Which heaven planted us to please,
    But, to exclude the world, did guard
    With watery, if not flaming sword,--
    What luckless apple did we taste,
    To make us mortal, and thee waste?
    Unhappy! shall we never more
    That sweet militia restore,
    When gardens only had their towers
    And all the garrisons were flowers,
    When roses only arms might bear,
    And men did rosy garlands wear?
    Tulips, in several colours barred,
    Were then the Switzers of our guard;
    The gardener had the soldier's place,
    And his more gentle forts did trace;
    The nursery of all things green
    Was then the only magazine;
    The winter quarters were the stoves,
    Where he the tender plants removes.
    But war all this doth overgrow:
    We ordnance plant, and powder sow.

    The arching boughs unite between
    The columns of the temple green,
    And underneath the wingèd quires
    Echo about their tunèd fires.
    The nightingale does here make choice
    To sing the trials of her voice;
    Low shrubs she sits in, and adorns
    With music high the squatted thorns;
    But highest oaks stoop down to hear,
    And listening elders prick the ear;
    The thorn, lest it should hurt her, draws
    Within the skin its shrunken claws.
    But I have for my music found
    A sadder, yet more pleasing sound;
    The stock-doves, whose fair necks are graced
    With nuptial rings, their ensigns chaste,
    Yet always, for some cause unknown,
    Sad pair, unto the elms they moan.
    O why should such a couple mourn,
    That in so equal flames do burn!
    Then as I careless on the bed
    Of gelid strawberries do tread,
    And through the hazels thick espy
    The hatching throstle's shining eye,
    The heron, from the ash's top,
    The eldest of its young lets drop,
    As if it stork-like did pretend
    That tribute to its lord to send.

    Thus I, easy philosopher,
    Among the birds and trees confer;
    And little now to make me, wants,
    Or of the fowls, or of the plants;
    Give me but wings as they, and I
    Straight floating on the air shall fly;
    Or turn me but, and you shall see
    I was but an inverted tree.
    Already I begin to call
    In their most learn'd original,
    And where I language want, my signs
    The bird upon the bough divines,
    And more attentive there doth sit
    Than if she were with lime-twigs knit,
    No leaf does tremble in the wind,
    Which I returning cannot find.
    One of these scattered Sibyls' leaves
    Strange prophecies my fancy weaves,
    And in one history consumes,
    Like Mexique paintings, all the plumes;
    What Rome, Greece, Palestine e'er said,
    I in this light mosaic read.
    Thrice happy he, who, not mistook,
    Hath read in Nature's mystic book!
    And see how chance's better wit
    Could with a mask my studies hit!
    The oak-leaves me embroider all,
    Between which caterpillars crawl;
    And ivy, with familiar trails,
    Me licks and clasps, and curls and hales.
    Under this Attic cope I move,
    Like some great prelate of the grove;
    Then, languishing with ease, I toss
    On pallets swoln of velvet moss,
    While the wind, cooling through the boughs,
    Flatters with air my panting brows.
    Thanks for your rest, ye mossy banks,
    And unto you, cool zephyrs, thanks,
    Who, as my hair, my thoughts too shed,
    And winnow from the chaff my head!

    How safe, methinks, and strong behind
    These trees, have I encamped my mind,
    Where beauty, aiming at the heart,
    Bends in some tree its useless dart,
    And where the world no certain shot
    Can make, or me it toucheth not,
    But I on it securely play
    And gall its horsemen all the day.
    Bind me, ye woodbines, in your twines
    Curl me about, ye gadding vines,
    And oh so close your circles lace,
    That I may never leave this place!
    But, lest your fetters prove too weak,
    Ere I your silken bondage break,
    Do you, O brambles, chain me too,
    And, courteous briars, nail me through!

    Oh what a pleasure 'tis to hedge
    My temples here with heavy sedge,
    Abandoning my lazy side,
    Stretched as a bank unto the tide,
    Or to suspend my sliding foot
    On the osier's underminèd root,
    And in its branches tough to hang,
    While at my lines the fishes twang?
    But now away, my hooks, my quills,
    And angles, idle utensils!
    The young MARIA walks to-night;

    'Tis she that to these gardens gave
    That wondrous beauty which they have;
    She straightness on the woods bestows;
    To her the meadow sweetness owes;
    Nothing could make the river be
    So crystal pure, but only she,
    She yet more pure, sweet, straight, and fair
    Than gardens, woods, meads, rivers are.

    This 'tis to have been from the first
    In a domestic heaven nursed,
    Under the discipline severe
    Of FAIRFAX, and the starry VERE;
    Where not one object can come nigh
    But pure, and spotless as the eye,
    And goodness doth itself entail
    On females, if there want a male."

This poem, having a biographical value, I have quoted at, perhaps, too
great length. Other poems of this garden-period of Marvell's life are
better known. His own English version of his Latin poem _Hortus_
contains lovely stanzas:--

    "How vainly men themselves amaze
    To win the palm, the oak, or bays;
    And their uncessant labours see
    Crowned from some single herb or tree,
    Whose short and narrow-vergèd shade
    Does prudently their toils upbraid;
    While all the flowers and trees do close,
    To weave the garlands of Repose!

    Fair Quiet, have I found thee here,
    And Innocence, thy sister dear?
    Mistaken long, I sought you then
    In busy companies of men.
    Your sacred plants, if here below,
    Only among the plants will grow;
    Society is all but rude
    To this delicious solitude.

    No white nor red was ever seen
    So amorous as this lovely green.

    What wond'rous life is this I lead!
    Ripe apples drop about my head;
    The luscious clusters of the vine
    Upon my mouth do crush their wine;
    The nectarine, and curious peach,
    Into my hands themselves do reach;
    Stumbling on melons, as I pass,
    Insnared with flowers, I fall on grass.

    Meanwhile the mind, from pleasure less,
    Withdraws into its happiness;--
    The mind, that ocean where each kind
    Does straight its own resemblance find;--
    Yet it creates, transcending these,
    Far other worlds, and other seas,
    Annihilating all that's made
    To a green thought in a green shade."[46:1]

Well known as are Marvell's lines to his Coy Mistress, I have not the
heart to omit them, so eminently characteristic are they of his style
and humour:--

    "Had we but world enough and time,
    This coyness, lady, were no crime.
    We would sit down and think which way
    To walk, and pass our long love's day.
    Thou by the Indian Ganges' side
    Should'st rubies find: I by the tide
    Of Humber would complain. I would
    Love you ten years before the Flood,
    And you should, if you please, refuse
    Till the conversion of the Jews.
    My vegetable love should grow
    Vaster than empires and more slow.
    An hundred years should go to praise
    Thine eyes, and on thy forehead gaze;
    Two hundred to adore each breast,
    But thirty thousand to the rest;
    An age at least to every part,
    And the last age should show your heart.
    For, lady, you deserve this state,
    Nor would I love at lower rate.
      But at my back I always hear
    Time's wingèd chariot hurrying near,
    And yonder all before us lie
    Deserts of vast eternity.
    Thy beauty shall no more be found,
    Nor in thy marble vault shall sound
    My echoing song; then worms shall try
    That long-preserved virginity,
    And your quaint honour turn to dust,
    And into ashes all my lust.
    The grave's a fine and private place,
    But none, I think, do there embrace.
      Now, therefore, while the youthful hue
    Sits on thy skin like morning dew,
    And while thy willing soul transpires
    At every pore with instant fires,
    Now, let us sport us while we may;
    And now, like amorous birds of prey,
    Rather at once our time devour,
    Than languish in his slow-chapt power!
    Let us roll all our strength, and all
    Our sweetness up into one ball;
    And tear our pleasures with rough strife,
    Through the iron gates of life!
    Thus, though we cannot make our sun
    Stand still, yet we will make him run."

Mr. Aitken's valuable edition of Marvell's poems and satires can now be
had of all booksellers for two shillings,[47:1] and with these volumes
in his possession the judicious reader will be able to supply his own
reflections whilst life beneath the sun is still his. Poetry is a
personal matter. The very canons of criticism are themselves literature.
If we like the _Ars Poetica_, it is because we enjoy reading Horace.


FOOTNOTES:

[20:1] For an account of Flecknoe, see Southey's _Omniana_, i. 105. Lamb
placed some fine lines of Flecknoe's at the beginning of the Essay _A
Quakers' Meeting_.

[24:1] Grosart, vol. iii. p. 175.

[24:2] _See_ preface to _Religio Laici_, Scott's _Dryden_, vol. x. p.
27.

[24:3] Jeremy Collier in his _Historical Dictionary_ (1705) describes
Marvell, to whom he allows more space (though it is but a few lines)
than he does to Shakespeare, "as to his opinion he was a dissenter." In
Collier's opinion Marvell may have been no better than a dissenter, but
in fact he was a Churchman all his life, and it was Collier who lived to
become a non-juror and a dissenter, and a schismatical bishop to boot.

[31:1] _Life of Lord Fairfax_, by C.R. Markham (1870), p. 365.

[35:1] The fifth edition is dated 1703.

[46:1] Many a reader has made his first acquaintance with Marvell on
reading these lines in the _Essays of Elia_ (_The Old Benchers of the
Inner Temple_).

[47:1] _Poems and Satires of Andrew Marvell_, 2 vols. Routledge, 1905.




CHAPTER III

A CIVIL SERVANT IN THE TIME OF THE COMMONWEALTH


When Andrew Marvell first made John Milton's acquaintance is not known.
They must both have had common friends at or belonging to Cambridge.
Fairfax may have made the two men known to each other, although it is
just as likely that Milton introduced Marvell to Fairfax. All we know is
that when the engagement at Nunappleton House came to an end, Marvell,
being then minded to serve the State in some civil capacity, applied to
the Secretary for Foreign Tongues for what would now be called a
testimonial, which he was fortunate enough to obtain in the form of a
letter to the Lord-President of the Council, John Bradshaw. Milton seems
always to have liked Bradshaw, who was not generally popular even on his
own side, and in the _Defensio Secunda pro populo Anglicano_ extols his
character and attainments in sonorous latinity. Bradshaw had become in
February 1649 the first President of the new Council of State, which,
after the disappearance of the king and the abolition of the House of
Lords, took over the burden of the executive, and claimed the right to
scrape men's consciences by administering to anybody it chose an oath
requiring them to approve of what the House of Commons had done against
the king, and of their abolition of kingly government and of the House
of Peers, and that the legislative and supreme power was wholly in the
House of Commons.

Before the creation of this Council the duties of Latin Secretary to the
Parliament had been discharged by Georg Rudolph Weckherlin, a German
diplomat who had married an Englishwoman. He retired in bad health at
this time, and Milton was appointed to his place in 1649. When, later
on, the sight of the most illustrious of all our civil servants failed
him, Weckherlin returned to the office as Milton's assistant. In
December 1652 ill-health again compelled Weckherlin's retirement.[49:1]

Milton's letter to Bradshaw, who had made his home at Eton, is dated
February 21, 1653, and is as follows:--

   "MY LORD,--But that it would be an interruption to the
   public wherein your studies are perpetually employed, I should now
   and then venture to supply thus my enforced absence with a line or
   two, though it were onely my business, and that would be no slight
   one, to make my due acknowledgments of your many favours; which I
   both do at this time and ever shall; and have this farther, which I
   thought my part to let you know of, that there will be with you
   to-morrow upon some occasion of business a gentleman whose name is
   Mr. Marvile, a man whom both by report and the converse I have had
   with him of singular desert for the State to make use of, who also
   offers himself, if there be any employment for him. His father was
   the Minister of Hull, and he hath spent four years abroad in Holland,
   France, Italy, and Spain to very good purpose, as I believe, and the
   gaining of these four languages, besides he is a scholer and
   well-read in the Latin and Greek authors, and no doubt of an approved
   conversation, for he now comes lately out of the house of the Lord
   Fairfax, who was Generall, where he was intrusted to give some
   instructions in the languages to the Lady, his daughter. If upon the
   death of Mr. Weckerlyn the Councell shall think that I shall need any
   assistance in the performance of my place (though for my part I find
   no encumbrance of that which belongs to me, except it be in point of
   attendance at Conferences with Ambassadors, which I must confess in
   my condition I am not fit for) it would be hard for them to find a
   man so fit every way for that purpose as this gentleman: one who, I
   believe, in a short time would be able to do them as much service as
   Mr. Ascan. This, my Lord, I write sincerely without any other end
   than to perform my duty to the publick in helping them to an humble
   servant; laying aside those jealousies and that emulation which mine
   own condition might suggest to me by bringing in such a coadjutor;
   and remain, my Lord, your most obliged and faithful servant,
                                                          JOHN MILTON.

   "_Feb. 21, 1652_ (O.S.)."

   Addressed: "For the Honourable the Lord Bradshawe."

No handsomer testimonial than this was ever penned. It was unsuccessful.
When Milton wrote to Bradshaw, Weckherlin was in fact dead, and on his
retirement in the previous December, John Thurloe, the very handy
Secretary of the Council, had for the time assumed Weckherlin's duties,
and obtained on that score an addition to his salary. No actual vacancy,
therefore, occurred on Weckherlin's death. None the less, shortly
afterwards, Philip Meadows, also a Cambridge man, was appointed Milton's
assistant, and Marvell had to wait four years longer for his place.

When Marvell's connection with Eton first began is not to be
ascertained. His friend, John Oxenbridge, who had been driven from his
tutorship at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, by Laud in 1634 to

    "Where the remote Bermudas ride,"

but had returned home, became in 1652 a Fellow of Eton College. Oliver
St. John, who at this time was Chancellor of the University of
Cambridge, and had married Oxenbridge's sister, was known to Marvell,
and may have introduced him to his brother-in-law. At all events Marvell
frequently visited Eton, where, however, he had the good sense to
frequent not merely the cloisters, but the poor lodgings where the "ever
memorable" John Hales, ejected from his fellowship, spent the last years
of his life.

   "I account it no small honour to have grown up into some part of his
   acquaintance and conversed awhile with the living remains of one of
   the clearest heads and best prepared breasts in Christendom."[51:1]

Hales died in 1656, and his _Golden Remains_ were first published three
years later. Marvell's words of panegyric are singularly well chosen. It
is a curious commentary upon the confused times of the Civil War and
Restoration that perhaps never before, and seldom, if ever, since, has
England contained so many clear heads and well-prepared breasts as it
did then. Small indeed is the influence of men of thought upon their
immediate surroundings.

The Lord Bradshaw, we know, had a home in Eton, and on the occasion of
one of Marvell's evidently frequent visits to the Oxenbridges, Milton
entrusted him with a letter to Bradshaw and a presentation copy of the
_Secunda defensio_. Marvell delivered both letter and book, and seems at
once to have informed the distinguished author that he had done so. But
alas for the vanity of the writing man! The sublime poet, who in his
early manhood had composed _Lycidas_, and was in his old age to write
_Paradise Lost_, demanded further and better particulars as to the
precise manner in which the chief of his office received, not only the
book, but the letter which accompanied it. Nobody is now left to think
much of Bradshaw, but in 1654 he was an excellent representative of the
class Carlyle was fond of describing as the _alors célèbre_. Prompted by
this desire, Milton must have written to Marvell hinting, as he well
knew how to do, his surprise at the curtness of his friend's former
communication, and Marvell's reply to this letter has come down to us.
It is Marvell's glory that long before _Paradise Lost_ he recognised the
essential greatness of the blind secretary, and his letter is a fine
example of the mode of humouring a great man. Be it remembered, as we
read, that this letter was not addressed to one of the greatest names in
literature, but to a petulant and often peevish scholar, living of
necessity in great retirement, whose name is never once mentioned by
Clarendon, and about whom the voluminous Thurloe, who must have seen him
hundreds of times, has nothing to say except that he was "a blind man
who wrote Latin letters." Odder still, perhaps, Richard Baxter, whose
history of his own life and times is one of the most informing books in
the world, never so much as mentions the one and only man whose name
can, without any violent sense of unfitness, be given to the age about
which Baxter was writing so laboriously.

   "HONOURED SIR,--I did not satisfie my self in the account I
   gave you of presentinge your Book to my Lord, although it seemed to
   me that I writ to you all which the messenger's speedy returne the
   same night from Eaton would permit me; and I perceive that, by reason
   of that hast, I did not give you satisfaction neither concerninge the
   delivery of your Letter at the same time. Be pleased therefore to
   pardon me and know that I tendered them both together. But my Lord
   read not the Letter while I was with him, which I attributed to our
   despatch, and some other businesse tendinge thereto, which I
   therefore wished ill to, so farr as it hindred an affaire much better
   and of greater importance, I mean that of reading your Letter. And to
   tell you truly mine own imagination, I thought that he would not open
   it while I was there, because he might suspect that I, delivering it
   just upon my departure, might have brought in it some second
   proposition like to that which you had before made to him by your
   Letter to my advantage. However, I assure myself that he has since
   read it, and you, that he did then witnesse all respecte to your
   person, and as much satisfaction concerninge your work as could be
   expected from so cursory a review and so sudden an account as he
   could then have of it from me. Mr. Oxenbridge, at his returne from
   London, will, I know, give you thanks for his book, as I do with all
   acknowledgement and humility for that you have sent me. I shall now
   studie it even to the getting of it by heart; esteeming it, according
   to my poore judgment (which yet I wish it were so right in all things
   else), as the most compendious scale for so much to the height of the
   Roman Eloquence, when I consider how equally it turnes and rises with
   so many figures it seems to me a Trajan's columne, in whose winding
   ascent we see imboss'd the severall monuments of your learned
   victoryes: And Salmatius and Morus make up as great a triumph as that
   of Decebalus, whom too, for ought I know, you shall have forced, as
   Trajan the other, to make themselves away out of a just desperation.
   I have an affectionate curiousity to know what becomes of Colonell
   Overton's businesse. And am exceeding glad that Mr. Skynner is got
   near you, the happinesse which I at the same time congratulate to him
   and envie, there being none who doth, if I may so say, more jealously
   honour you then, Honoured Sir, Your most affectionate humble servant,
                                                       ANDREW MARVELL.

   "Eaton, _June 2, 1654._"

   Addressed: "For my most honoured friend,
                  John Milton, Esquire, Secretarye
                     for the Forrain affaires
                        at his house in Petty France,
                           Westminster."

To conclude Marvell's Eton experiences; in 1657, and very shortly before
his obtaining his appointment as Milton's assistant in the place of
Philip Meadows, who was sent on a mission to Lisbon, Marvell was chosen
by the Lord-Protector to be tutor at Eton to Cromwell's ward, Mr.
Dutton, and took up his residence with his pupil with the Oxenbridges.
The following letter, addressed by Marvell to Oliver, will be read with
interest:--

   "May it please your Excellence,--It might, perhaps, seem fit for me
   to seek out words to give your Excellence thanks for myself. But,
   indeed, the only civility which it is proper for me to practice with
   so eminent a person is to obey you, and to perform honestly the work
   that you have set me about. Therefore I shall use the time that your
   Lordship is pleased to allow me for writing, onely for that purpose
   for which you have given me it; that is, to render you an account of
   Mr. Dutton. I have taken care to examine him several times in the
   presence of Mr. Oxenbridge, as those who weigh and tell over money
   before some witnesse ere they take charge of it; for I thought that
   there might be possibly some lightness in the coyn, or errour in the
   telling, which hereafter I should be bound to make good. Therefore,
   Mr. Oxenbridge is the best to make your Excellency an impartial
   relation thereof: I shall only say, that I shall strive according to
   my best understanding (that is, according to those rules your
   Lordship hath given me) to increase whatsoever talent he may have
   already. Truly, he is of gentle and waxen disposition; and God be
   praised, I cannot say he hath brought with him any evil impression;
   and I shall hope to set nothing into his spirit but what may be of a
   good sculpture. He hath in him two things that make youth most easy
   to be managed,--modesty, which is the bridle to vice; and emulation,
   which is the spur to virtue. And the care which your Excellence is
   pleased to take of him is no small encouragement and shall be so
   represented to him; but, above all, I shall labour to make him
   sensible of his duty to God; for then we begin to serve faithfully,
   when we consider He is our master. And in this, both he and I owe
   infinitely to your Lordship, for having placed us in so godly a
   family as that of Mr. Oxenbridge, whose doctrine and example are like
   a book and a map, not only instructing the ear, but demonstrating to
   the eye, which way we ought to travell; and Mrs. Oxenbridge has
   looked so well to him, that he hath already much mended his
   complexion; and now she is ordering his chamber, that he may delight
   to be in it as often as his studys require. For the rest, most of
   this time hath been spent in acquainting ourselves with him; and
   truly he is chearfull, and I hope thinks us to be good company. I
   shall, upon occasion, henceforward inform your Excellence of any
   particularities in our little affairs, for so I esteem it to be my
   duty. I have no more at present, but to give thanks to God for your
   Lordship, and to beg grace of Him, that I may approve myself, Your
   Excellency's most humble and faithful servant,
                                                       ANDREW MARVELL.

   "Windsor, _July 28, 1653_.

   "Mr. Dutton[55:1] presents his most humble service to your
   Excellence."

Something must now be said of Marvell's literary productions during this
period, 1652-1657. It was in 1653 that he began his stormy career as an
anonymous political poet and satirist. The Dutch were his first victims,
good Protestants though they were. Marvell never liked the Dutch, and
had he lived to see the Revolution must have undergone some qualms.

In 1652 the Commonwealth was at war with the United Provinces. Trade
jealousy made the war what politicians call "inevitable." This jealousy
of the Dutch dates back to Elizabeth, and to the first stirring in the
womb of time of the British navy. This may be readily perceived if we
read Dr. John Dee's "Petty Navy Royal," 1577, and "A Politic Plat (plan)
for the Honour of the Prince," 1580, and, somewhat later in date,
"England's Way to Win Wealth," 1614.[56:1]

These short tracts make two things quite plain--first, the desire to get
our share of the foreign fishing trade, then wholly in the hands of the
Dutch; and second, the recognition that England was a sea-empire,
dependent for its existence upon a great navy manned by the seafaring
inhabitants of our coasts.

The enormous fishing trade done in our own waters by the Dutch, the
splendid fleet of fishing craft with twenty thousand handy sailors on
board, ready by every 1st of June to sail out of the Maas, the Texel,
and the Vlie, to catch herring in the North Sea, excited admiration,
envy, and almost despair.

   "O, slothful England and careless countrymen! look but on these
   fellows that we call the plump Hollanders! Behold their diligence in
   fishing and our most careless negligence! Six hundred of these
   fisherships and more be great Busses, some six score tons, most of
   them be a hundred tons, and the rest three score tons and fifty tons;
   the biggest of them having four and twenty men, some twenty men, and
   some eighteen or sixteen men apiece. So there cannot be in this fleet
   of People no less than twenty thousand sailors.... No king upon the
   earth did ever see such a fleet of his own subjects at any time, and
   yet this fleet is there and then yearly to be seen. A most worthy
   sight it were, if they were my own countrymen, yet have I taken
   pleasure in being amongst them, to behold the neatness of their ships
   and fishermen, how every man knoweth his own place, and all labouring
   merrily together.[57:1]

   "Now, in our sum of fishermen, let us see what vent have we for our
   fish in other countries, and what commodities and corn is brought
   into this Kingdom? And what ships are set in work by them whereby
   mariners are best employed. Not one. It is pitiful! ... This last
   year at Yarmouth there were three hundred idle men that could get
   nothing to do, living very poor for lack of employment, which most
   gladly would have gone to sea in Pinks if there had been any for them
   to go in.... And this last year the Hollanders did lade 12 sail of
   Holland ships with red herrings at Yarmouth for Civita Vecchia,
   Leghorn and Genoa and Marseilles and Toulon. Most of these being
   laden by the English merchants. So that if this be suffered the
   English owners of ships shall have but small employment for
   them."[57:2]

Nor was the other aspect of the case lost sight of. How can a great navy
necessary for our sea-empire be manned otherwise than by a race of brave
sea-faring men, accustomed from their infancy to handle boats?

   "Fourthly, how many thousands of soldiers of all degrees would be by
   these means not only hardened well to brook all rage and disturbance
   of sea, but also would be well practised and trained to great
   perfection of understanding all manner of fight and service of sea,
   so that in time of great need that expert and hardy crew of some
   thousands of sea-soldiers would be to this realm a treasure
   incomparable.[58:1]

   "We see the Hollanders being well fed in fishing affairs and stronger
   and lustier than the sailors who use the long Southern voyages, but
   these courageous, young, lusty, strong-fed younkers that shall be
   bred in the Busses, when His Majesty shall have occasion for their
   service in war against the enemy, will be fellows for the nonce! and
   will put more strength to an iron crow at a piece of great ordnance
   in training of a cannon, or culvining with the direction of the
   experimented master Gunner, then two or three of the forenamed
   surfeited sailors. And in distress of wind-grown sea and foul
   winter's weather, for flying forward to their labour, for pulling in
   a top-sail or a sprit-sail, or shaking off a bonnet in a dark night!
   for wet or cold cannot make them shrink nor stain, that the North
   Seas and the Busses and Pinks have dyed in the grain for such
   purposes."[58:2]

The years, as they went by, only served to increase English jealousy of
the Dutch, who not only fished our water but did the carrying trade of
the world. It was no rare sight to see Yarmouth full of Dutch bottoms,
and Dutch sailors loading them with English goods.

In the early days of the Commonwealth the painfulness of the situation
was accentuated by the fact that some of our colonies or plantations, as
they were then called--Virginia and the Barbadoes, for example--stuck to
the king and gave a commercial preference to the Dutch, shipping their
produce to all parts of the world exclusively in Dutch bottoms. This was
found intolerable, and in October 1651 the Long Parliament, nearing its
violent end, passed the first Navigation Act, of which Ranke says: "Of
all the acts ever passed in Parliament, it is perhaps the one which
brought about the most important results for England and the
world."[59:1]

The Navigation Act provided "that all goods from countries beyond Europe
should be imported into England in English ships only; and all European
goods either in English ships or in ships belonging to the countries
from which these articles originally came."

This was a challenge indeed.

Another perpetual source of irritation was the Right of Search, that is,
the right of stopping neutral ships and searching their cargoes for
contraband. England asserted this right as against the Dutch, who, as
the world's carriers, were most subject to the right, and not
unnaturally denied its existence.

War was declared in 1652, and made the fame of two great admirals, Blake
and Van Tromp. Oliver's spirit was felt on the seas, and before many
months were over England had captured more than a thousand Dutch trading
vessels, and brought business to a standstill in Amsterdam--then the
great centre of commercial interests. When six short years afterwards
the news of Cromwell's death reached that city, its inhabitants greatly
rejoiced, crowding the streets and crying "the Devil is dead."

Andrew Marvell was impregnated with the new ideas about sea-power. A
great reader and converser with the best intellects of his time, and a
Hull man, he had probably early grasped the significance of Bacon's
illuminating saying in the famous essay on the _True Greatness of
Kingdoms and Estates_ (first printed in 1612), "that he that commands
the sea is at great liberty and may take as much and as little of the
war as he will." Cromwell, though not the creator of our navy, was its
strongest inspiration until Nelson, and no feature of his great
administration so excited Marvell's patriotic admiration as the
Lord-Protector's sleepless energy in securing and maintaining the
command of the sea.

In Marvell's poem, first published as a broadsheet in 1655, entitled
_The First Anniversary of the Government under His Highness the
Lord-Protector_, he describes foreign princes soundly rating their
ambassadors for having misinformed them as to the energies of the new
Commonwealth:--

    "'Is this,' saith one, 'the nation that we read
    Spent with both wars, under a Captain dead!
    Yet rig a navy while we dress us late
    And ere we dine rase and rebuild a state?
    What oaken forests, and what golden mines,
    What mints of men--what union of designs!
    ...
    Needs must we all their tributaries be
    Whose navies hold the sluices of the sea!
    _The ocean is the fountain of command_,
    But that once took, we captives are on land;
    And those that have the waters for their share
    Can quickly leave us neither earth nor air.'"

Marvell's aversion to the Dutch was first displayed in the rough lines
called _The Character of Holland_, published in 1653 during the first
Dutch War. As poetry the lines have no great merit; they do not even
jingle agreeably--but they are full of the spirit of the time, and
breathe forth that "envy, hatred, malice, and all uncharitableness"
which are apt to be such large ingredients in the compound we call
"patriotism." They begin thus:--

    "Holland, that scarce deserves the name of land,
    As but the off-scouring of the British sand,
    And so much earth as was contributed
    By English pilots when they heaved the lead,
    Or what by the ocean's slow alluvion feel
    Of shipwrecked cockle and the muscle-shell,--
    This indigested vomit of the sea
    Fell to the Dutch by just propriety."

The gallant struggle to secure their country from the sea is made the
subject of curious banter:--

    "How did they rivet with gigantic piles,
    Thorough the centre their new-catched miles,
    And to the stake a struggling country bound,
    Where barking waves still bait the forced ground,
    Building their watery Babel far more high,
    To reach the sea, than those to scale the sky!
    Yet still his claim the injured ocean laid,
    And oft at leap-frog o'er their steeples played,
    As if on purpose it on land had come
    To show them what's their _mare liberum_.
    A daily deluge over them does boil;
    The earth and water play at level coil.
    The fish ofttimes the burgher dispossessed,
    And sat, not as a meat, but as a guest."

This final conceit greatly tickled the fancy of Charles Lamb, who was
perhaps the first of the moderns to rediscover both the rare merits and
the curiosities of our author. Hazlitt thought poorly of the jest.[61:1]

Marvell proceeds with his ridicule to attack the magistrates:--

    "For, as with pygmies, who best kills the crane;
    Among the hungry, he that treasures grain;
    Among the blind, the one-eyed blinkard reigns;
    So rules among the drowned, he that drains:
    Not who first see the rising sun, commands,
    But who could first discern the rising lands;
    Who best could know to pump an earth so leak,
    Him they their Lord, and Country's Father, speak;
    To make a bank, was a great plot of state;
    Invent a shovel, and be a magistrate."[62:1]

When the war-fever was raging such humour as this may well have passed
muster with the crowd.

The incident--there is always an "incident"--which served as the actual
excuse for hostilities, is referred to as follows:--

    "Let this one courtesy witness all the rest,
    When their whole navy they together pressed,
    Not Christian captives to redeem from bands,
    Or intercept the western golden sands,
    No, but all ancient rights and leagues must fail,
    _Rather than to the English strike their sail_;
    To whom their weather-beaten province owes
    Itself."

Two spirited lines describe the discomfiture of Van Tromp:--

    "And the torn navy staggered with him home
    While the sea laughed itself into a foam."

This first Dutch War came to an end in 1654, when Holland was compelled
to acknowledge the supremacy of the English flag in the home waters, and
to acquiesce in the Navigation Act. It is a curious commentary upon the
black darkness that conceals the future, that Cromwell, dreading as he
did the House of Orange and the youthful grandson of Charles the First,
who at the appointed hour was destined to deal the House of Stuart a far
deadlier stroke than Cromwell had been able to do, either on the field
of battle or in front of Whitehall, refused to ratify the Treaty of
Peace with the Dutch until John De Witt had obtained an Act excluding
the Prince of Orange from ever filling the office of Stadtholder of the
Province of Holland.

The contrast between the glory of Oliver's Dutch War and the shame of
Charles the Second's sank deep into Marvell's heart, and lent bitterness
to many of his later satirical lines.

Marvell's famous _Horatian Ode upon Cromwell's Return from Ireland_ in
1650 has a curious bibliographical interest. So far as we can tell, it
was first published in 1776. When it was composed we do not know. At
Nunappleton House Oliver was not a _persona grata_ in 1650, for he had
no sooner come back from Ireland than he had stepped into the shoes of
the Lord-General Fairfax; and there were those, Lady Fairfax, I doubt
not, among the number, who believed that the new Lord-General thought it
was high time he should be where Fairfax's "scruple" at last put him. We
may be sure Cromwell's character was dissected even more than it was
extolled at Nunappleton. The famous Ode is by no means a panegyric, and
its true hero is the "Royal actor," whom Cromwell, so the poem suggests,
lured to his doom. It is not likely that the Ode was composed after
Marvell had left Nunappleton, though it may have been so before he went
there. There is an old untraceable tradition that Marvell was among the
crowd that saw the king die. What deaths have been witnessed, and with
what strange apparent apathy, by the London crowd! But for this
tradition one's imagination would trace to Lady Fairfax the most famous
of the stanzas.

But to return to the history of the Ode. In 1776 Captain Edward
Thompson, a connection of the Marvell family and a versatile sailor with
a passion for print, which had taken some odd forms of expression,
produced by subscription in three quarto volumes the first collected
edition of Andrew Marvell's works, both verse and prose. Such an edition
had been long premeditated by Thomas Hollis, one of the best friends
literature had in the eighteenth century. It was Hollis who gave to
Sidney Sussex College the finest portrait in existence of Oliver
Cromwell. Hollis collected material for an edition of Marvell with the
aid of Richard Barron, an early editor of Milton's prose works, and of
Algernon Sidney's _Discourse concerning Government_. Barron, however,
lost zeal as the task proceeded, and complained justly enough "of a want
of anecdotes," and as the printer, the well-known and accomplished
Bowyer, doubted the wisdom of the undertaking, it was allowed to drop.
Barron died in 1766, and Hollis in 1774, but the collections made by the
latter passed into the hands of Captain Thompson, who, with the
assistance of Mr. Robert Nettleton, a grandson of one of Marvell's
sisters, at once began to get his edition ready. On Nettleton's death
his "Marvell" papers came into Thompson's hands, and among them was, to
quote the captain's own words, "a volume of Mr. Marvell's poems, some
written with his own hand and the rest copied by his order."

The _Horatian Ode_ was in this volume, and was printed from it in
Thompson's edition of 1776.

What has become of this manuscript book? It has disappeared--destroyed,
so we are led to believe, in a fit of temper by the angry and uncritical
sea-captain.

This precious volume undoubtedly contained some poems by Marvell, and as
his handwriting was both well known from many examples, and is highly
characteristic, we may also be certain that the captain was not mistaken
in his assertion that some of these poems were in Marvell's own
handwriting. But, as ill-luck would have it, the volume also contained
poems written at a later period and in quite another hand. Among these
latter pieces were Addison's verses, _The Spacious Firmament on High_
and _When all thy Mercies, O my God_; Dr. Watts' paraphrase _When Israel
freed from Pharaoh's Hand_; and Mallet's ballad _William and Margaret_.
The two Addison pieces and the Watts paraphrase appeared for the first
time in the _Spectator_, Nos. 453, 465, and 461, in 1712, and Mallet's
ballad was first printed in 1724.

Still there these pieces were, in manuscript, in this volume, and as
there were circumstances of mystification attendant upon their prior
publication, what does the captain do but claim them all, _Songs of
Zion_ and sentimental ballad alike, as Marvell's. This of course brought
the critics, ever anxious to air their erudition, down upon his head,
raised his anger, and occasioned the destruction of the book.

Mr. Grosart says that Captain Thompson states that the _Horatian Ode_
was in Marvell's handwriting. I cannot discover where this statement is
made, though it is made of other poems in the volume, also published for
the first time by the captain.

All, therefore, we know is that the Ode was first published in 1776 by
an editor who says he found it copied in a book, subsequently destroyed,
which contained (among other things) some poems written in Marvell's
handwriting, and that this book was given to the editor by a
grand-nephew of the poet.

Yet I imagine, poor as this evidence may seem to be, no student of
Marvell's life and character (so far as his life reveals his character),
and of his verse (so much of it as is positively known), wants more
evidence to satisfy him that the _Horatian Ode_ is as surely Marvell's
as the lines upon _Appleton House_, the _Bermudas_, _To his Coy
Mistress_, and _The Garden_.

The great popularity of this Ode undoubtedly rests on the three
stanzas:--

    "That thence the royal actor borne,
    The tragic scaffold might adorn,
      While round the armèd bands;
      Did clap their bloody hands:

    He nothing common did, or mean,
    Upon that memorable scene,
      But with his keener eye
      The axe's edge did try;

    Nor called the gods with vulgar spite
    To vindicate his helpless right,
      But bowed his comely head
      Down, as upon a bed."

It is strange that the death of the king should be so nobly sung in an
Ode bearing Cromwell's name and dedicate to his genius:--

    "So restless Cromwell could not cease
    In the inglorious arts of peace,
      But through adventurous war
      Urgèd his active star;

    ...

    Then burning through the air he went,
    And palaces and temples rent;
      And Cæsar's head at last
      Did through his laurels blast.

    'Tis madness to resist or blame
    The force of angry Heaven's flame;
      And if we would speak true,
      Much to the man is due,

    Who, from his private gardens, where
    He lived reservèd and austere,
      (As if his highest plot
      To plant the bergamot),

    Could by industrious valour climb
    To ruin the great work of time,
      And cast the kingdoms old
      Into another mould."

The last stanzas of all have much pith and meaning in them:--

    "But thou, the war's and fortune's son,
    March indefatigably on!
      And for the last effect,
      Still keep the sword erect.

    Besides the force it has to fright
    The spirits of the shady night,
      The same arts that did gain
      A power, must it maintain."[67:1]

It is not surprising that this Ode was not published in 1650--if indeed
it was the work of that, and not of a later year. There is nothing
either of the courtier or of the partisan about its stately
versification and sober, solemn thought. Entire self-possession,
dignity, criticism of a great man and a strange career by one well
entitled to criticise, are among the chief characteristics of this noble
poem. It is infinitely refreshing, when reading and thinking about
Cromwell, to get as far away as possible from the fanatic's scream and
the fury of the bigot, whether of the school of Laud or Hobbes. Andrew
Marvell knew Oliver Cromwell alive, and gazed on his features as he lay
dead--he knew his ambition, his greatness, his power, and where that
power lay. How much might we unwittingly have lost, if Captain Thompson
had not printed a poem which for more than a century of years had
remained unknown, and exposed to all the risks of a single manuscript
copy!

When Cromwell sent his picture to Queen Christina of Sweden to
commemorate the peace he concluded with her in 1654, Marvell, though not
then attached to the public service, was employed to write the Latin
couplet that accompanied the picture. He discharged his task as
follows:--

    _In effigiem Oliveri Cromwell_.

    "Hæc est quæ toties inimicos umbra fugavit
      At sub quâ cives otia lenta terunt."

The authorship of these lines is often attributed to Milton, but there
is little doubt they are of Marvell's composition. They might easily
have been better.

Marvell became Milton's assistant in September 1657, and the friendship
between the two men was thus consolidated by the strong ties of a
common duty. Milton's blindness making him unfit to attend the reception
of foreign embassies, Marvell took his place and joined in respectfully
greeting the Dutch ambassadors. After all he was but a junior clerk,
still he doubtless rejoiced that his lines on Holland had been published
anonymously. Literature was strongly represented in this department of
State just then, for Cromwell's Chamberlain, Sir Gilbert Pickering, who
represented Northamptonshire in Parliament, had taken occasion to
introduce his nephew, John Dryden, to the public service, and he was
attached to the same office as Andrew Marvell. Poets, like pigeons, have
often taken shelter under our public roofs, but Milton, Marvell, and
Dryden, all at the same time, form a remarkable constellation. Old Noll,
we may be sure, had nothing to do with it. Marvell must have known
Cromwell personally; but there is nothing to show that Milton and
Cromwell ever met. The popular engraving which represents a theatrical
Lord-Protector dictating despatches to a meek Milton is highly
ludicrous. Cromwell could have as easily dictated a book of _Paradise
Lost_, on the composition of which Milton began to be engaged during the
last year of the Protectorate, as one of Milton's despatches.

In April 1657 Admiral Blake, the first great name in the annals of our
navy, performed his last feat of arms by destroying the Spanish West
Indian fleet at Santa Cruz without the loss of an English vessel. The
gallant sailor died of fever on his way home, and was buried according
to his deserts in the Abbey. His body, with that of his master, was by a
vote of Parliament, December 4, 1660, taken from the grave and drawn to
the gallows-tree, and there hanged and buried under it. Pepys, who was
to know something of naval administration under the second Charles, has
his reflections on this unpleasing incident.

Marvell's lines on Blake's victory over the Spaniards are not worthy of
so glorious an occasion, but our great doings by land and sea have
seldom been suitably recorded in verse. Drayton's _Song of Agincourt_ is
imperishable, but was composed nearly two centuries after the battle.
The wail of Flodden Field still floats over the Border; but Miss
Elliot's famous ballad was published in 1765. Even the Spanish Armada
had to wait for Macaulay's spirited fragment. Mr. Addison's _Blenheim_
stirred no man's blood; no poet sang Chatham's victories.[70:1] Campbell
at a later day did better. We must be content with what we get.

Marvell's poem contains some vigorous lines, which show he was a good
hater:--

    "Now does Spain's fleet her spacious wings unfold,
    Leaves the new world, and hastens for the old;
    But though the wind was fair, they slowly swum,
    Freighted with acted guilt, and guilt to come;
    For this rich load, of which so proud they are,
    Was raised by tyranny, and raised for war.
    ...
    ...
    For now upon the main themselves they saw
    That boundless empire, where you give the law."

The Canary Islands are rapturously described--their delightful climate
and their excellent wine. Obviously they should be annexed:--

    "The best of lands should have the best of Kings."

The fight begins. "Bold Stayner leads" and "War turned the temperate to
the torrid zone":--

    "Fate these two fleets, between both worlds, had brought
    Who fight, as if for both those worlds they fought.
    ...
    ...
    The all-seeing sun ne'er gazed on such a sight,
    Two dreadful navies there at anchor fight,
    And neither have, or power, or will, to fly;
    There one must conquer, or there both must die."

Blake sinks the Spanish ships:--

    "Their galleons sunk, their wealth the sea does fill,
    The only place where it can cause no ill";

and the poet concludes:--

    "Ah! would those treasures which both Indias have
    Were buried in as large, and deep a grave!
    War's chief support with them would buried be,
    And the land owe her peace unto the sea.
    Ages to come your conquering arms will bless.
    There they destroyed what had destroyed their peace;
    And in one war the present age may boast,
    The certain seeds of many wars are lost."

Good politics, if but second-rate poetry. This was the last time the
Spanish war-cry _Santiago, y cierra España_ rang in hostility in English
ears.

Turning for a moment from war to love, on the 19th of November 1657
Cromwell's third daughter, the Lady Mary Cromwell, was married to
Viscount, afterwards Earl, Fauconberg. The Fauconbergs took revolutions
calmly and, despite the disinterment of their great relative, accepted
the Restoration gladly and lived to chuckle over the Revolution. The
forgetfulness, no less than the vindictiveness, of men is often
surprising. Marvell, who played the part of Laureate during the
Protectorate, produced two songs for the conventionally joyful
occasion. The second of the two is decidedly pretty for a November
wedding:--

    "_Hobbinol._ PHILLIS, TOMALIN, away!
                 Never such a merry day,
                 For the northern shepherd's son
                 Has MENALCAS' daughter won.

    _Phillis._   Stay till I some flowers have tied
                 In a garland for the bride.

    _Tomalin._   If thou would'st a garland bring,
                 PHILLIS, you may wait the spring:
                 They have chosen such an hour
                 When she is the only flower.

    _Phillis._   Let's not then, at least, be seen
                 Without each a sprig of green.

    _Hobbinol._  Fear not; at MENALCAS' hall
                 There are bays enough for all.
                 He, when young as we, did graze,
                 But when old he planted bays.

    _Tomalin._   Here she comes; but with a look
                 Far more catching than my hook;
                 'Twas those eyes, I now dare swear,
                 Led our lambs we knew not where.

    _Hobbinol._  Not our lambs' own fleeces are
                 Curled so lovely as her hair,
                 Nor our sheep new-washed can be
                 Half so white or sweet as she.

    _Phillis._   He so looks as fit to keep
                 Somewhat else than silly sheep.

    _Hobbinol._  Come, let's in some carol new
                 Pay to love and them their due.

    _All._  Joy to that happy pair
            Whose hopes united banish our despair.
            What shepherd could for love pretend,
            Whilst all the nymphs on Damon's choice attend?
            What shepherdess could hope to wed
            Before Marina's turn were sped?
            Now lesser beauties may take place
            And meaner virtues come in play;
                    While they
                Looking from high
                    Shall grace
            Our flocks and us with a propitious eye."

All this merriment came to an end on the 3rd of September 1658, when
Oliver Cromwell died on the anniversary of Dunbar fight and of the field
of Worcester. And yet the end, though it was to be sudden, did not at
once seem likely to be so. There was time for the poets to tune their
lyres. Waller, Dryden, Sprat, and Marvell had no doubt that "Tumbledown
Dick" was to sit on the throne of his father and "still keep the sword
erect," and were ready with their verses.

Westminster Abbey has never witnessed a statelier, costlier funeral than
that of "the late man who made himself to be called Protector," to quote
words from one of the most impressive passages in English prose, the
opening sentences of Cowley's _Discourse by way of Vision concerning the
Government of Oliver Cromwell_. The representatives of kings,
potentates, and powers crowded the aisles, and all was done that pomp
and ceremony could do. Marvell, arrayed in the six yards of mourning the
Council had voted him on the 7th of September, was, we may be sure, in
the Abbey, and it may well be that his blind colleague, to whom the same
liberal allowance had been made, leant on his arm during the service.
Milton's muse remained silent. The vote of the House of Commons ordering
the undoing of this great ceremony was little more than two years ahead.
_O caeca mens hominum!_

Among the poems first printed by Captain Thompson from the old
manuscript book was one which was written therein in Marvell's own hand
entitled "A poem upon the Death of his late Highness the Protector." Its
composition was evidently not long delayed:--

    "We find already what those omens mean,
    Earth ne'er more glad nor Heaven more serene.
    Cease now our griefs, calm peace succeeds a war,
    Rainbows to storms, Richard to Oliver."

The lines best worth remembering in the poem are the following:--

    "I saw him dead: a leaden slumber lies,
    And mortal sleep over those wakeful eyes;
    Those gentle rays under the lids were fled,
    Which through his looks that piercing sweetness shed;
    That port, which so majestic was and strong,
    Loose, and deprived of vigour, stretched along;
    All withered, all discoloured, pale and wan,
    How much another thing, no more that man!
    O, human glory vain! O, Death! O, wings!
    O, worthless world! O, transitory things!
    Yet dwelt that greatness in his shape decayed,
    That still though dead, greater than Death he laid,
    And in his altered face you something feign
    That threatens Death, he yet will live again."


FOOTNOTES:

[49:1] In 1659 Clarendon, then Sir Edward Hyde, and in Brussels, writing
to Sir Richard Fanshaw, says, "You are the secretary of the Latin tongue
and I will mend the warrant you sent, and have it despatched as soon as
I hear again from you, but I must tell you the place in itself, if it be
not dignified by the person who hath some other qualification, is not to
be valued. There is no signet belongs to it, which can be only kept by a
Secretary of State, from whom the Latin Secretary always receives orders
and prepares no despatches without his direction, and hath only a fee of
a hundred pound a year. And therefore, except it hath been in the hands
of a person who hath had some other employment, it hath fallen to the
fortune of inconsiderable men as Weckerlin was the last" (_Hist. MSS.
Com._, _Heathcote Papers_, 1899, p. 9).

[51:1] _The Rehearsal Transprosed_.--Grosart, iii. 126.

[55:1] Even Mr. Firth can tell me nothing about this Ward of Cromwell's.

[56:1] For reprints of these tracts, see _Social England Illustrated_,
Constable and Co., 1903.

[57:1] "England's Way to Win Wealth." See _Social England Illustrated_,
p. 253.

[57:2] _Ibid._ p. 265.

[58:1] Dr. Dee's "Petty Navy Royal." _Social England Illustrated_, p.
46.

[58:2] "England's Way to Win Wealth." _Social England Illustrated_, p.
268.

[59:1] Ranke's _History of England during the Seventeenth Century_, vol.
iii. p. 68.

[61:1] See Leigh Hunt's _Wit and Humour_ (1846), pp. 38, 237.

[62:1] Butler's lines, _A Description of Holland_, are very like
Marvell's:--

    "A Country that draws fifty foot of water
    In which men live as in a hold of nature.
    ...
    ...
    They dwell in ships, like swarms of rats, and prey
    Upon the goods all nations' fleets convey;
    ...
    ...
    That feed like cannibals on other fishes,
    And serve their cousin-germans up in dishes:
    A land that rides at anchor and is moor'd,
    In which they do not live but go aboard."

Marvell and Butler were rival wits, but Holland was a common butt; so
powerful a motive is trade jealousy.

[67:1] "To one unacquainted with Horace, this Ode, not perhaps so
perfect as his are in form, and with occasional obscurities of
expression, which Horace would not have left, will give a truer notion
of the kind of greatness which he achieved than could, so far as I know,
be obtained from any other poem in our language."--_Dean Trench_.

[70:1] "In the last war, when France was disgraced and overpowered in
every quarter of the globe, when Spain coming to her assistance only
shared her calamities, and the name of an Englishman was reverenced
through Europe, no poet was heard amidst the general acclamation; the
fame of our counsellors and heroes was entrusted to the gazetteer."--Dr.
Johnson's _Life of Prior_.




CHAPTER IV

IN THE HOUSE OF COMMONS


Cromwell's death was an epoch in Marvell's history. Up to that date he
had, since he left the University, led the life of a scholar, with a
turn for business, and was known to many as an agreeable companion and a
lively wit. He was keenly interested in public affairs, and personally
acquainted with some men in great place, and for a year before
Cromwell's death he had been in a branch of the Civil Service; but of
the wear and tear, the strife and contention, of what are called
"practical politics" he knew nothing from personal experience.

Within a year of the Protector's death all this was changed and, for the
rest of his days, with but the shortest of occasional intervals, Andrew
Marvell led the life of an active, eager member of Parliament, knowing
all that was going on in the Chamber and hearing of everything that was
alleged to be going on in the Court; busily occupied with the affairs of
his constituents in Hull, and daily watching, with an increasingly heavy
heart and a bitter humour, the corruption of the times, the declension
of our sea-power, the growing shame of England, and what he believed to
be a dangerous conspiracy afoot for the undoing of the Reformation and
the destruction of the Constitution in both Church and State.

"Garden-poetry" could not be reared on such a soil as this. The age of
Cromwell and Blake was over. The remainder of Marvell's life (save so
far as personal friendship sweetened it) was spent in politics, public
business, in concocting roughly rhymed and bitter satirical poems, and
in the composition of prose pamphlets.

Through it all Marvell remained very much the man of letters, though one
with a great natural aptitude for business. His was always the critical
attitude. He was the friend of Milton and Harrington, of the political
philosophers who invented paper constitutions in the "Rota" Club, and of
the new race of men whose thoughts turned to Natural Science, and who
founded the Royal Society. Office he never thought of. He could have had
it had he chosen, for he was a man of mark, even of distinction, from
the first. Clarendon has told us how members of the House of Commons
"got on" in the Long Parliament of Charles the Second. It was full of
the king's friends, who ran out of the House to tell their shrewd master
the gossip of the lobbies, "commended this man and discommended another
who deserved better, and would many times, when His Majesty spoke well
of any man, ask His Majesty if he would give them leave to let that
person know how gracious His Majesty was to him, or bring him to kiss
his hand. To which he commonly consenting, every one of his servants
delivered some message from him to a Parliament man, and invited him to
Court, as if the King would be willing to see him. And by this means the
rooms at Court were always full of the members of the House of Commons.
This man brought to kiss his hand, and the King induced to confer with
that man and to thank him for his affection, which could never conclude
without some general expression of grace or promise, which the poor
gentleman always interpreted to his own advantage, and expected some
fruit from it that it could never yield."

The suspicious Clarendon, already shaking to his fall, goes on to add,
"all which, being contrary to all former order, did the King no good,
and rendered those unable to do him service who were inclined to
it."[77:1]

It is a lifelike picture Clarendon draws of the crowded rooms, and of
the witty king moving about fooling vanity, ambition, and corruption to
the top of their bent. That the king chose his own ministers is plain
enough.

Marvell was at the beginning well disposed towards Charles. They had
some points in common; and among them a quick sense of humour and a turn
for business. But the member for Hull must soon have recognised that
there was no place for an honest quick-witted man in any Stuart
administration.

Marvell and his great chief remained in their offices until the close of
the year 1659, when the impending Restoration enforced their retirement.
Milton used his leisure to pour forth excited tracts to prove how easy
it would still be to establish a Free Commonwealth. Once again, and for
the last time, he prompted the age to quit its clogs

    "by the known rules of ancient liberty."

These pamphlets of Milton's prove how little that solitary thinker ever
knew of the real mind and temper of the English people.

The Lord Richard Cromwell was exactly the sort of eldest son a great
soldier like Oliver, who had put his foot on fortune's neck, was likely
to have. Richard (1626-1712) was not, indeed, born in the purple, but
his early manhood was nurtured in it. Religion, as represented by long
sermons, tiresome treatises, and prayerful exercises, bored him to
death. Of enthusiasm he had not a trace, nor was he bred to arms. He
delighted in hunting, in the open air, and the company of sportsmen.
Whatever came his way easily, and as a matter of right, he was well
content to take. He bore himself well on State occasions, and could make
a better speech than ever his father was able to do. But he was not a
"restless" Cromwell, and had no faith in his destiny. I do not know
whether he had ever read _Don Quixote_, in Shelton's translation, a very
popular book of the time; probably not, for, though Chancellor of the
University of Oxford, Richard was not a reading man, but if he had, he
must have sympathised with Sancho Panza's attitude of mind towards the
famous island.

   "If your highness has no mind that the government you promised should
   be given me, God made me of less, and perhaps it may be easier for
   Sancho, the Squire, to get to Heaven than for Sancho, the Governor.
   _In the dark all cats are gray._"

The new Protector took up the reins of power with proper forms and
ceremonies, and at once proceeded to summon a Parliament, an Imperial
Cromwellian Parliament, containing representatives both from Scotland
and Ireland. In this Parliament Andrew Marvell sat for the first time as
one of the two members for Kingston-upon-Hull. His election took place
on the 10th of January 1659, being the first county day after the
sheriff had received the writ. Five candidates were nominated: Thomas
Strickland, Andrew Marvell, John Ramsden, Henry Smyth, and Sir Henry
Vane, and a vote being taken in the presence of the mayor, aldermen, and
many of the burgesses, John Ramsden and Andrew Marvell were declared
duly elected.

Nobody to-day, glancing his eye over a list of the knights and
burgesses who made up Richard Cromwell's first and last Parliament,
would ever guess that it represented an order of things of the most
recent date which was just about to disappear. On paper it has a solid
look. The fine old crusted Parliamentary names with which the clerks
were to remain so long familiar as the members trooped out to divide
were more than well represented.[79:1] The Drakes of Amersham were
there; Boscawens, Bullers, and Trelawneys flocked from Cornwall; Sir
Wilfred Lawson sat for Cumberland, and his son for Cockermouth; a
Knightly represented Northamptonshire, whilst Lucys from Charlecote
looked after Warwick, both town and county. Arthur Onslow came from
Surrey, a Townshend from Norfolk, and, of course, a Bankes from Corfe
Castle;[79:2] Oxford University, contented, as she occasionally is, to
be represented by a great man, had chosen Sir Matthew Hale, whilst the
no less useful and laborious Thurloe sat for the sister University.
Anthony Ashley Cooper was there, but in opposition, snuffing the morrow.
Mildmays, Lawleys, Binghams, Herberts, Pelhams, all travelled up to
London with the Lord-Protector's writs in their pockets. A less
revolutionary assembly never met, though there was a regicide or two
among them. But when the members found themselves alone together there
was some loose talk.

On the 27th of January 1659 Marvell attended for the first time in his
place, when the new Protector opened Parliament, and made a speech in
the House of Lords, which was pronounced at the time to be "a very
handsome oration."

The first business of the Commons was to elect a Speaker, nor was their
choice a very lucky one, for it first fell on Chaloner Chute, who
speedily breaking down in health, the Recorder of London was appointed
his substitute, but the Recorder being on his deathbed at the time, and
Chute dying very shortly afterwards, Thomas Bampfield was elected
Speaker, and continued so to be until the Parliament was dissolved by
proclamation on the 22nd of April. This proclamation was Richard
Cromwell's last act of State.

Marvell's first Parliament was both short and inglorious. One only of
its resolutions is worth quoting:--

   "That a very considerable navy be forthwith provided, and put to sea
   for the safety of the Commonwealth and the preservation of the trade
   and commerce thereof."

It was, however, the army and not the navy that had to be reckoned
with--an army unpaid, angry, suspicious, and happily divided. I must not
trace the history of faction. There is no less exalted page in English
history since the days of Stephen. Monk is its fitting hero, and Charles
the Second its expensive saviour of society. The story how the
Restoration was engineered by General Monk, who, if vulgar, was adroit,
both on land and sea, is best told from Monk's point of view in the
concluding chapter of _Baker's Chronicle_ (Sir Roger de Coverley's
favourite Sunday reading), whilst that old-fashioned remnant, who still
love to read history for fun, may not object to be told that they will
find printed in the Report of the Leyborne-Popham Papers (_Historical
Manuscripts Commission_, 1899, p. 204) a _Narrative of the Restoration_,
by Mr. John Collins, the Chief Butler of the Inner Temple, proving in
great and highly diverting detail how this remarkable event was really
the work not so much of Monk as of the Chief Butler.

Richard Cromwell having slipped the collar, the officers assumed
command, as they were only too ready to do, and recalled the old,
dishonoured, but pertinacious Rump Parliament, which, though mustering
at first but forty-two members, at once began to talk and keep journals
as if nothing had happened since the day ten years before, when it was
sent about its business. Old Speaker Lenthall was routed out of
obscurity, and much against his will, and despite his protests, clapped
once more into the chair. Dr. John Owen, an old parliamentary preaching
hand, was once again requisitioned to preach before the House, which he
did at enormous length one fine Sunday in May.

The Rump did not prove a popular favourite. It was worse than Old Noll
himself, who could at least thrash both Dutchman and Spaniard, and be
even more feared abroad than he was hated at home. The City of London,
then almost an Estate of the Realm, declared for a Free Parliament, and
it soon became apparent to every one that the whole country was eager to
return as soon as possible to the old mould. Nothing now stood between
Charles and his own but half a dozen fierce old soldiers and their
dubious, discontented, unpaid men.

It was once commonly supposed (it is so no longer), that the Restoration
party was exclusively composed of dispossessed Cavaliers, bishops in
hiding, ejected parsons, high-flying _jure divino_ Episcopalians,
talkative toss-pots, and the great pleasure-loving crowd, cruelly
repressed under the rule of the saints. Had it been left to these
ragged regiments, the issue would have been doubtful, and the result
very different. The Presbyterian ministers who occupied the rectories
and vicarages of the Church of England and their well-to-do flocks in
both town and country were, with but few exceptions, all for King
Charles and a restored monarchy. In this the ministers may have shown a
sound political instinct, for none of them had any more mind than the
Anglican bishops to tolerate Papists, Socinians, Quakers, and Fifth
Monarchy men, but in their management of the business of the Restoration
these divines exposed themselves to the same condemnation that Clarendon
in an often-quoted passage passed upon his own clerical allies. When
read by the light of the Act of "Uniformity," the "Corporation," the
"Five Mile," and the "Conventicle" Acts, the conduct of the
Presbyterians seems recklessness itself, whilst the ignorance their
ministers displayed of the temper of the people they had lived amongst
all their lives, and whom they adjured to cry _God save the King_, but
not to drink his Majesty's health (because health-drinking was forbidden
in the Old Testament), would be startling were it not so eminently
characteristic.[82:1]

The Rump, amidst the ridicule and contempt of the populace, was again
expelled by military force on the 13th of October 1659. The officers
were divided in opinion, some supporting, others, headed by Lambert,
opposing the Parliament; but _vis major_, or superior cunning, was on
the side of Lambert, who placed his soldiers in the streets leading to
Westminster Hall, and when the Speaker came in his coach, his horses
were turned, and he was conducted very civilly home. The regiments that
should have resisted, "observing that they were exposed to derision,"
peaceably returned to their quarters.

Monk, in the meanwhile, was advancing with his army from Edinburgh, and
affected not to approve of the force put upon Parliament. The feeling
for a Free Parliament increased in strength and violence every day. The
Rump was for a third time restored in December by the section of the
London army that supported its claim. Lenthall was once more in the
chair, and the journals were resumed without the least notice of past
occurrences. Monk, having reached London amidst great excitement, went
down to the House and delivered an ambiguous speech. Up to the last Monk
seems to have remained uncertain what to do. The temper of the City,
which was fiercely anti-Rump, may have decided him. At all events he
invited the secluded, that is the expelled, members of the old Long
Parliament to take their seats along with the others, and in a formal
declaration addressed to Parliament, dated the 21st of February 1660, he
counselled it among other things to dissolve legally "in order to make
way for a succession of Parliaments." In a word, Monk declared for a
Free Parliament. Great indeed were the national rejoicings.

On the 16th of March 1660 a Bill was read a third time dissolving the
Parliament begun and holden at Westminster, 3rd November 1640, and for
the calling and holding of a Parliament at Westminster on the 25th of
April 1660. This time an end was really made of the Rump, though for
many a long day there were parliamentary pedants to be found in the land
ready to maintain that the Long Parliament had never been legally
dissolved and still _de jure_ existed; so long, I presume, as any
single member of it remained alive.

Marvell was not a "Rumper," but on the 2nd of April 1660 he was again
elected for Hull to sit in what is usually called the Convention
Parliament. John Ramsden was returned at the head of the poll with 227
votes, Marvell receiving 141. There were four defeated candidates.

With this Convention Parliament begins Marvell's remarkable
correspondence, on fine folio sheets of paper, with the corporation of
Hull, whose faithful servant he remained until death parted them in
1678.

This correspondence, which if we include in it, as we well may, the
letters to the Worshipful Society of Masters and Pilots of the Trinity
House in Hull, numbers upwards of 350 letters, and with but one
considerable gap (from July 1663 to October 1665) covers the whole
period of Marvell's membership, is, I believe, unique in our public
records. The letters are preserved at Hull, where I hope care is taken
to preserve them from the autograph hunter and the autograph thief.
Captain Thompson printed a great part of this correspondence in 1776,
and Mr. Grosart gave the world the whole of it in the second volume of
his edition of Marvell's complete works.

An admission may as well be made at once. This correspondence is not so
interesting as it might have been expected to prove. Marvell did not
write letters for his biographer, nor to instruct posterity, nor to
serve any party purpose, nor even to exhibit honest emotion, but simply
to tell his employers, whose wages he took, what was happening at
Westminster. He kept his reflections either to himself or for his
political broadsheets, and indeed they were seldom of the kind it would
have been safe to entrust to the post.

Good Mr. Grosart fusses and frets terribly over Marvell's astonishing
capacity for chronicling in sombre silence every kind of legislative
abomination. It is at times a little hard to understand it, for Hull was
what may be called a Puritan place. No doubt caution dictated some of
the reticence--but the reserve of Marvell's character is one of the few
traits of his personality that has survived. He was a satirist, not an
enthusiast.

I will give the first letter _in extenso_ to serve as a specimen, and a
very favourable one, of the whole correspondence:--

                                                     "_Nov. 17, 1660._

   "GENTLEMEN, MY WORTHY FRIENDS,--Although during the necessary absence
   of my partner, Mr. Ramsden, I write with but halfe a penn, and can
   scarce perswade myselfe to send you so imperfect an account of your
   own and the publick affairs, as I needs must for want of his
   assistance; yet I had rather expose mine own defects to your good
   interpretation, then excuse thereby a totall neglect of my duty, and
   that trust which is divided upon me. At my late absence out of Town I
   had taken such order that if you had commanded me any thing, I might
   soon haue received it, and so returned on purpose to this place to
   haue obeyed you. But hearing nothing of that nature howeuer, I was
   present the first day of the Parliament's sitting, and tooke care to
   write to Mr. Maior what work we had cut out. Since when, we have had
   little new, but onely been making a progresse in those things I then
   mentioned. There is yet brought in an Act in which of all others your
   corporation is the least concerned: that is, where wives shall refuse
   to cohabit with their husbands, that in such case the husband shall
   not be liable to pay any debts which she may run into, for clothing,
   diet, lodging, or other expenses. I wish with all my heart you were no
   more touched in a vote that we haue made for bringing in an Act of a
   new Assessment for six moneths, of 70,000li. _per mensem_, to begin
   next January. The truth is, the delay ere monyes can be got in, eats
   up a great part of all that is levying, and that growing charge of the
   Army and Navy doubles upon us. And that is all that can be said for
   excuse of ourselues to the Country, to whom we had giuen our own hopes
   of no further sessment to be raised, but must now needs incurre the
   censure of improvidence before or prodigality now, though it becomes
   no private member, the resolution having passed the House, to
   interpose further his own judgment in a thing that can not be
   remedied; and it will be each man's ingenuity not to grudge an
   after-payment for that settlement and freedome from Armyes and Navyes,
   which before he would haue been glad to purchase with his whole
   fortune. There remain some eight Regiments to be disbanded, but those
   all horse in a manner, and some seauenteen shipps to be payd of, that
   haue laid so long upon charge in the harbour, beside fourscore shipps
   which are reckoned to us for this Winter guard. But after that, all
   things are to go upon his Majestye's own purse out of the Tunnage and
   Poundage and his other revenues. But there being so great a provision
   made for mony, I doubt not but ere we rise, to see the whole army
   disbanded, and according to the Act, hope to see your Town once more
   ungarrisond, in which I should be glad and happy to be instrumentall
   to the uttermost. For I can not but remember, though then a child,
   those blessed days when the youth of your own town were trained for
   your militia, and did, methought, become their arms much better than
   any soldiers that I haue seen there since. And it will not be amisse
   if you please (now that we are about a new Act of regulating the
   Militia, that it may be as a standing strength, but not as ill as a
   perpetuall Army to the Nation) to signify to me any thing in that
   matter that were according to your ancient custome and desirable for
   you. For though I can promise little, yet I intend all things for your
   service. The Act for review of the Poll bill proceeds, and that for
   making this Declaration of his Majesty a Law in religious matters.
   Order likewise is giuen for drawing up all the votes made during our
   last sitting, in the businesse of Sales of Bishops' and Deans' and
   Chapters' lands into an Act, which I should be glad to see passed. The
   purchasers the other day offerd the house 600,000li. in ready mony,
   and to make the Bishops', etc., revenue as good or better then before.
   But the House thought it not fit or seasonable to hearken to it. We
   are so much the more concernd to see that great interest of the
   purchasers satisfyed and quieted, at least in that way which our own
   votes haue propounded. On Munday next we are to return to the
   consideration of apportioning 100,000li. per annum upon all the lands
   in the nation, in lieu of the Court of Wards. The debate among the
   Countyes, each thinking it self overrated, makes the successe of that
   businesse something casuall, and truly I shall not assist it much for
   my part, for it is little reason that your Town should contribute in
   that charge. The Excise bill for longer continuance (I wish it proue
   not too long) will come in also next weeke. And I foresee we shall be
   called upon shortly to effect our vote made the former sitting, of
   raising his Majestie's revenue to 1,200,000li. per Annum. I do not
   love to write so much of this mony news. But I think you haue observed
   that Parliaments have been always made use of to that purpose, and
   though we may buy gold too deare, yet we must at any rate be glad of
   Peace, Freedom, and a good Conscience. Mr. Maior tells me, your
   duplicates of the Poll are coming up. I shall go with them to the
   Exchequer and make your excuse, if any be requisite. My long silence
   hath made me now trespasse on the other hand in a long letter, but I
   doubt not of your good construction of so much familiarity and trouble
   from, Gentlemen, your most affectionate friend and servant,

                                                       "ANDR: MARVELL.

   "WESTMINSTER, _Nov. 17, 1660._"

Although this first letter of the Hull correspondence is dated the 17th
of November 1660, the Convention Parliament began its sittings on the
25th of April.

In composition this Convention Parliament was very like Richard
Cromwell's, and indeed it contained many of the same members, whose
loyalty, however, was less restrained than in 1659. All the world knew
what brought this Parliament together. It was to make the nation's
peace with its king, either on terms or without terms. "We are all
Royalists now" are words which must often have been on the lips of the
members of this House. One can imagine the smiles, half grim, half
ironical, that would accompany their utterance. Such a right-about-face
could never be dignified. It is impossible not to be reminded of
schoolboys at the inevitable end of "a barring out." The sarcastic
comment of Clarendon has not lost its sting. "From this time there was
such an emulation and impatience in Lords, Commons, and City, and
generally over the Kingdom, who should make the most lively expressions
of their duty and of their joy, that a man could not but wonder where
those people dwelt who had done all the mischief and kept the King so
many years from enjoying the comfort and support of such excellent
subjects."[88:1]

The most significant sentence in Marvell's first letter to his
constituents is that in which he refers to the Bill for making Charles's
declaration in religious matters the law of the land. Had the passing of
any such Bill been possible, how different the history of England would
have been!

The declaration Marvell is referring to was contained in the famous
message from Breda, which was addressed by Charles to all his loving
subjects of what degree or quality, and was expressed as follows:--

   "And because the passion and uncharitableness of the times have
   produced several opinions in Religion by which men are engaged in
   parties and animosities against each other (which, when they shall
   hereafter unite in a freedom of conversation, will be composed or
   better understood) we do declare a liberty to tender Consciences, and
   that no man shall be disquieted or called in question for differences
   of opinion in matters of Religion which do not disturb the peace of
   the Kingdom; and that we shall be ready to consent to such an Act of
   Parliament as upon mature deliberation shall be offered to us for the
   full granting of that indulgence."

It is only doing the king bare justice to say that he was always ready
and willing to keep this part of his royal word--but it proved an
impossibility.

A Roman Catholic as a matter of creed, a Hobbist in conversation, a
sensualist in practice, and the shrewdest though most indolent of cynics
in council, Charles, in this matter of religious toleration, would
gladly have kept his word, not indeed because it was his word, for on
the point of honour he was indifferent, but because it jumped with his
humour, and would have mitigated the hard lot of the Catholics. Charles
was not a theorist, all his tastes being eminently practical, not to say
scientific. He was not a tyrant, but a _de facto_ man from head to heel.
For the _jure divino_ of the English Episcopate he cared as little as
Oliver had ever done for the _jure divino_ of the English Crown. Oliver
once said, and he was not given to _braggadocio_, that he would fire his
pistol at the king "as soon as at another if he met him in battle," and
the second Charles would have thought no more of beheading an Anglican
bishop than he did of sending Sir Harry Vane to the scaffold. Honesty
and virtue, on the rare occasions Charles encountered them, he admired
much as a painter admires the colours of a fine sunset. Above everything
else Charles was determined never again, if he could help it, to be sent
on his travels, to be snubbed and starved in foreign courts.

Sir Thomas Urquhart of Cromartie, the first and best translator of
Rabelais, is said to have died of laughing on hearing of the
Restoration; Charles did not die, but he must have laughed inwardly at
the spectacle that met his eyes everywhere as he made his
often-described progress from Dover to London, and examined the gorgeous
beds and quilts, fine linen and carpets, couches, horses and liveries,
his faithful Commons had been at the pains and at the expense of
providing for his comfort.

A few years afterwards Marvell wrote the following lines:--

    "Of a tall stature and of sable hue,
    Much like the son of Kish, that lofty Jew;
    Twelve years complete he suffered in exile
    And kept his father's asses all the while.
    At length, by wonderful impulse of fate,
    The people called him home to help the state,
    And what is more they sent him money too
    To clothe him all from head to foot anew;
    Nor did he such small favours then disdain,
    Who in his thirtieth year began his reign."[90:1]

The "small favours" grew in size year by year.

Why it was impossible for Charles to keep his word may be read in
Clarendon's _Life_, and in the history of the Savoy Conference, and need
not be restated here. In the opinion of the Anglican clergy, the king's
divine right stood no higher than their own. They too had suffered in
exile. They had been "robbed" of their tithes, and turned out of their
palaces, rectories and vicarages, and excluded from the churches they
still called "theirs." Their Book of Common Prayer was no longer in
common use, having been banished by the "Directory of Public Worship"
since 1645. So late as July 1, 1660, Pepys records attending a service
in the Abbey, and adds "No Common Prayer yet." If we find ourselves
wondering why the Anglican party should have been so powerful in 1660,
our wonder ought not to be greater than is excited by the power of the
Puritan party when Laud was put to death. Both parties were, on each
occasion, in a minority. Though England has never been long
priest-ridden, it has often been priest-led.

The Convention Parliament did all that was expected of it. It was,
however irregularly summoned, a truly representative assembly. Its
members all swore--what will not members of Parliament swear?--that the
king was supreme in Church and State, the only rightful king of the
realm and of all other his dominions, and that from their hearts they
abhorred, detested, and abjured the damnable doctrine that princes,
excommunicated or deprived of the Pope, might be murdered by their
subjects. They proceeded to pass a very useful Act of Indemnity and
Oblivion, agreeing to let bygones be bygones, except in certain named
cases. They ordered Mr. John Milton to be taken into custody, and
prosecuted (which he never was) by the Attorney-General. Later on the
poet was released from custody, and we find Mr. Marvell complaining to
the House that their sergeant had extracted £150 in fees before he would
let Mr. Milton go. On which Sir Heneage Finch, afterwards Lord
Chancellor, laconically observed that Milton deserved hanging. He
certainly got off easily, but, as he lived to publish _Paradise Lost_,
_Paradise Regained_, and _Samson Agonistes_, he may be said to have
earned his freedom. All his poetry put together never brought him in a
third of the sum the sergeant got for letting him out of prison. General
Monk, the man-midwife, who so skilfully assisted at that great Birth of
Time, the Restoration, was made a duke, and Cromwell's army, so long the
force behind the supreme power, was paid its arrears and (two regiments
excepted) disbanded. "Fifty thousand men," says Macaulay, "accustomed to
the profession of arms, were thrown upon the world ... in a few months
there remained not a trace indicating that the most formidable army in
the world had just been absorbed in the mass of the community."[92:1]

After this the House of Commons fell to discussing religion, and made
the sad discovery that differences of opinion still existed. In these
circumstances they decided to refer the matter to their pious king, and
to such divines as he might choose. They then voted large sums of money
for the royal establishment, and, it being the very end of August,
adjourned till the 6th of November. As for making constitutional terms
with the king, they never attempted it, though Sir Matthew Hale is
credited with an attempt to induce them to do so. Any proposals of the
kind must have failed. The people were in no mood for making
constitutions.

Having met again on the 6th of November, Marvell, in a letter to the
Mayor and Aldermen of Hull, dated the 27th of the month, reports that
"the House fell upon the making out of the King's revenue to £1,200,000
a year." "The Customs are estimated toward £500,000 per annum in the
revenue. His lands and fee farms £250,000. The Excise of Beer and Ale
£300,000, the rest arise out of the Post Office, Wine Licenses,
Stannaries Court, Probate of Wills, Post-fines, Forests, and other
rights of the Crown. The excise of Foreign Commodities is to be
continued apart until satisfaction of public debts and engagements
secured upon the excise."

This settlement of revenue marks "the beginning of a time." Cromwell, as
Cowley puts it in his _Discourse_, by far the ablest indictment of
Oliver ever penned, "took armes against two hundred thousand pounds a
year, and raised them himself to above two millions." It is true.
Cromwell spent the money honestly and efficiently, and chiefly on a navy
that enabled him to wrest the command of the sea from the Dutch, to
secure the carrying trade, and to challenge the world for supremacy in
the Indies, both East and West. In doing this, he had the instinct of
the whole nation behind him. But it was expensive.

Had Charles been the most honest and thrifty of men, instead of one of
the most dishonest and extravagant, he must have found his financial
position a very difficult one. He was poorer than Cromwell. The feudal
taxation had fallen into desuetude. To revive wardships, etc., was
impossible, to recover arrears hopeless. There was nothing for it but
scientific taxation. One of his first Acts contains a schedule of taxed
articles extending over fifteen double-columned pages of a quarto
volume. To raise this revenue was difficult--in fact impossible, and the
amount actually obtained was always far below the estimates.

Marvell's letter concludes thus:--

   "To-morrow is the Bill for enacting his Majesty's declaration in
   religious matters and to have its first reading. It is said that on
   Sunday next Doctor Reynolds shall be created Bishop of Norwich."

The rumour about Reynolds's bishopric proved to be true. The new bishop
was a very "moderate" Anglican indeed, and his appointment was meant as
a sop to the Presbyterians. Richard Baxter and Edmund Calamy refused
similar preferment.

On the 29th of November Marvell's letter contains the following
passage:--

   "Yesterday the Bill of the King's Declaration in religious matters
   was read for the first time; but upon the question for a second
   reading 'twas carried 183 against 157 in the negative, so there is an
   end of that Bill and for those excellent things therein. We must
   henceforth rely only upon his Majesty's goodness, who, I must needs
   say, hath hitherto been more ready to give than we to receive."

It is a noticeable feature of this correspondence that Marvell seldom
mentions which way he voted himself.

The letter of the 4th of December contains some interesting matter:--

   "GENTLEMEN,--Since my last, upon Thursday, the Bill for Vicarages
   hath been carryed up to the Lords; and a Message to them from our
   House that they would expedite the Bill for confirmation of Magna
   Charta, that for confirmation of marriages, and other bills of
   publick concernment, which haue laid by them euer since our last
   sitting, not returned to us. We had then the Bill for six moneths
   assesment in consideration, and read the Bill for taking away Court
   of Wards and Purveyance, and establishing the moiety of the Excise
   of Beere and ale in perpetuum, about which we sit euery afternoon in
   a Grand Committee. Upon Sunday last were consecrated in the Abby at
   Westminster, Doctor Cossins, Bishop of Durham, Sterne of Carlile,
   Gauden of Exeter, Ironside of Bristow, Loyd of Landaffe, Lucy of St.
   Dauids, Lany, the seuenth, whose diocese I remember not at present,
   and to-day they keep their feast in Haberdasher's hall, in London.
   Dr. Reinolds was not of the number, who is intended for Norwich. A
   Congedelire is gone down to Hereford for Dr. Monk, the Generall's
   brother, at present Provost of Eaton. 'Tis thought that since our
   throwing out the Bill of the King's Declaration, Mr. Calamy, and
   other moderate men, will be resolute in refusing of Bishopricks....
   To-day our House was upon the Bill of Attainder of those that haue
   been executed, those that are fled, and of Cromwell, Bradshaw,
   Ireton, and Pride, and 'tis ordered that the carkasses and coffins
   of the four last named, shall be drawn with what expedition
   possible, upon an hurdle to Tyburn, there (to) be hanged up for a
   while, and then buryed under the gallows....

   "WESTMINSTER, _Dec. 4, 1660_."

Marvell's cool reporting of the hideous indignity inflicted upon his old
master, and allowing it to pass _sub silentio_, is one of the many
occasions that stirred Mr. Grosart's wonder. Nerves were tough in those
days. Pepys tells us unconcernedly enough how, after seeing Lord
Southampton sworn in at the Court of Exchequer as Lord Treasurer, he
noticed "the heads of Cromwell, Bradshaw, and Ireton set up at the
further end of Westminster Hall." It is quite possible Lady Fauconberg
may have seen the same sight.[95:1]

The Convention Parliament was dissolved on the 29th of December 1660.

On 1st April 1661 Marvell was returned for the third and last time for
Hull, for Charles the Second's first Parliament was of unconscionable
long duration, not being dissolved till January 1679, after Marvell's
death. It is known in history as the Pensionary or Long Parliament. The
election figures were as below:--

        Colonel Gilbey,       294
        Mr. Andrew Marvell,   240
        Mr. Edward Barnard,   195
        Mr. John Ramsden,     122

Marvell was not present at or before the election, for on the 6th of
April he writes:--

   "I perceive by Mr. Mayor that you have again (as if it were grown a
   thing of course) made choice of me now, the third time, to serve for
   you in Parliament, which as I cannot attribute to anything but your
   constancy, so shall I, God willing, as in gratitude obliged, with no
   less constancy and vigour continue to execute your commands and study
   your service."

A word may here be said about payment of borough members. The members'
fee was 6s. 8d. for every day the Parliament lasted. The wages were paid
by the corporation out of the borough funds. It was never a popular
charge. Burgesses in many places cared as little for M.P.'s as do some
of their successors for free libraries. Prynne, perhaps the greatest
parliamentary lawyer that ever lived, told Pepys one day, as they were
driving to the Temple, that the number of burgesses to be returned to
Parliament for any particular borough was not, for aught Prynne could
find, fixed by law, but was at first left to the discretion of the
sheriff, and that several boroughs had complained of the sheriff's
putting them to the charge of sending up burgesses.

In August 1661 the corporation paid Marvell £28 for his fee as one of
their burgesses, being 6s. 8d. a day for eighty-four days, the length of
the Convention Parliament. Marvell continued to take his wages until the
end of his days; but it is perhaps a mistake to suppose he was the very
last member to do so. It was, however, unusual in Marvell's time.[96:1]

This Pensionary Parliament, though of a very decided "Church and King"
complexion, was not in its original composition a body lacking character
or independence, but it steadily deteriorated in both respects.
Vacancies, as they occurred, and they occurred very frequently in those
days of short lives, were filled up by courtiers and pensioners.

In the small tract, entitled _Flagellum Parliamentum_, which is a highly
libellous "Dod," often attributed to Marvell, a record is preserved of
more than two hundred members of this Parliament in 1675. Despite some
humorous touches, this _Flagellum Parliamentum_ is still disagreeable to
read. But the most graphic picture we have of this Parliament is to be
found in one of Lord Shaftesbury's political tracts entitled "A letter
from a Parliament man to his Friend" (1675):--

   "SIR,--I see you are greatly scandalized at our slow and confused
   Proceedings. I confess you have cause enough; but were you but
   within these walls for one half day, and saw the strange make and
   complexion that this house is of, you would wonder as much that ever
   you wondered at it; for we are such a pied Parliament, that none can
   say of what colour we are; for we consist of Old Cavaliers, Old
   Round-Heads, Indigent-Courtiers, and true Country Gentlemen: the two
   latter are most numerous, and would in probability bring things to
   some issue were they not clogged with the numerous uncertainties of
   the former. For the Old Cavalier, grown aged, and almost past his
   vice, is damnable godly and makes his doting piety more a plague to
   the world than his debauchery was, for he is so much a by-got to the
   B(ishop) that he forces his Loyalty to strike sail to his Religion,
   and could be content to pare the nails a little of the Civil
   Government, so you would but let him sharpen the Ecclesiastical
   Talons: which behaviour of his so exasperates the Round-Head, that
   he on the other hand cares not what increases the Interest of the
   Crown receives, so he can but diminish that of the miter: so that
   the Round-Head had rather enslave the Man than the Conscience: the
   Cavalier rather the Conscience than the Man; there being a
   sufficient stock of animosity as proper matter to work upon. Upon
   these, therefore, the Courtier mutually plays, for if any Ante-court
   motion be made he gains the Round-Head either to oppose or absent by
   telling them, If they will join him now he will join them for
   Liberty of Conscience. And when any affair is started on behalf of
   the Country he assures the Cavaliers, If they will then stand by him
   he will then join with them in promoting a Bill against the
   fanatics. Thus play they on both hands.... Wherefore it were happy
   that he had neither Round-Head nor Cavalier in the House, for they
   are each of them so prejudicate against the other that their sitting
   here signifies nothing but their fostering their old venom and lying
   at catch to stop every advantage to bear down each other, though it
   be in the destruction of their country. For if the Round-Heads bring
   in a good bill the Old Cavalier opposes it, for no other reason but
   because they brought it in."[98:1]

Such was the theatre of Marvell's public actions for the rest of his
days, and if at times he may need forgiveness for the savagery of his
satire, it ought to be found easy to forgive him.

The two members for Hull were soon immersed in matters of much local
importance. They began by quarrelling with one another, Marvell writing
"the bond of civility betwixt Col. Gilby and myself being unhappily
snappt in pieces, and in such manner that I cannot see how it is
possible ever to knit them again." House of Commons quarrels are usually
soon made up, and so was this one. The custom was for _both_ members to
sign these letters, though they are all written in Marvell's hand--but
if this was for any reason inconvenient, Marvell signed alone. No
letters, unless in Marvell's writing, are preserved at Hull, which is a
curious fact.

One of these bits of local business related to a patent alleged to have
been granted by the Crown to certain persons, authorising them to erect
and maintain _ballast wharfs_ in the various ports, and to make charges
in respect of them. This was resented by the members for the ports, and
on Marvell's motion the matter was referred to the Committee of
Grievances, before whom the patentees were summoned. When they came it
appeared that the patent warranted none of the exactions that had been
demanded, and also that the warrant sent down to Hull naming these
charges was nothing more than a draft framed by the patentees
themselves, and not authorised in any way. The patent was at once
suspended. Marvell, like a true member of Parliament, wishes to get any
little local credit that may be due for such prompt action, and
writes:--

   "In this thing (although I count all things I can do for your service
   to be mere trifles, and not worth taking notice of in respect of what
   I owe you) I must do myself that right to let you know that I, and I
   alone, have had the happiness to do that little which hitherto is
   effected."

The matter required delicate handling, for a reason Marvell gives:
"Because, if the King's right in placing such impositions should be
weakened, neither should he have power to make a grant of them to you."

Another much longer business related to a lighthouse, which some
outsiders were anxious to build in the Humber. The corporation of Hull,
acting on Marvell's advice, had petitioned the Privy Council, and were
asked by their business-like member "to send us up a dormant credit for
an hundred pound, which we yet indeed have no use of, but if need be
must have ready at hand to reward such as will not otherwise befriend
your business." Some months later Marvell forwards an account, not of
the £100, but of the legal expenses about the lighthouse. He wishes it
were less, but hopes that the "vigorous resistance" will discourage the
designers from proceeding farther. This it did not do. As a member of
the bar, I find two or three of the items in this old-world Bill of
Costs interesting:--

   To Mr. Scroggs to attend the Council,        £3  6  0
    "  "    "  again for the same,               3  6  0
   Spent on Mr. Scroggs at dinner,                 18  0
   To Mr. Scroggs again,                         3  0  0
   Fees of the Council Table,                    1 10  0
   Fee to Clerk of the Council,                  2  0  0
   For dinner for Mr. Scroggs and wine after,    1  0  0
   To Mr. Cresset (the Solicitor),              20  0  0
   To Mr. Scroggs for a dinner,                  1  0  0

The barrister who was so frequently "refreshed" by Marvell lived to
become "the infamous Lord Chief Justice Scroggs" of all school
histories.

A week before the prorogation of Parliament, which happened on the 19th
of May 1662, Marvell went to Holland and remained there for nine months,
for he did not return until the very end of March 1663, more than a
month after the reassembling of the House.

What took him there nobody knows. Writing to the Trinity House about the
lighthouse business on the 8th of May 1662, Marvell says:--

   "But that which troubles me is that by the interest of some persons
   too potent for me to refuse, and who have a great direction and
   influence upon my counsels and fortune, I am obliged to go beyond
   sea before I have perfected it (_i.e._ the lighthouse business). But
   first I do thereby make my Lord Carlisle (who is a member of the
   Privy Council and one of them to whom your business is referred)
   absolutely yours. And my journey is but into Holland, from whence I
   shall weekly correspond as if I were at London with all the rest of
   my friends, towards the affecting your business. Then I leave Col.
   Gilbey there, whose ability for business and affection to yours is
   such that I cannot be wanted though I am missing."

It is plain from this that Lord Carlisle is one of the powerful persons
referred to--but beyond this we cannot go.

Whilst in Holland Marvell wrote both to the Trinity House and to the
corporation on business matters.

In March 1663 Marvell came back in a hurry, some complaints having been
made in Hull about his absence. He begins his first letter after his
return as follows:--

   "Being newly arrived in town and full of business, yet I could not
   neglect to give you notice that this day (2nd April 1663) I have been
   in the House and found my place empty, though it seems, as I now
   hear, that some persons would have been so courteous as to have
   filled it for me."

In none of these letters is any reference made to the debates in the
House on the unhappy Bill of Uniformity, nor does any record of those
discussions anywhere exist. The Savoy Conference proved a failure, and
no lay reader of Baxter's account of it can profess wonder. Not a single
point in difference was settled. In the meantime the restored Houses of
Convocation, from which the Presbyterian members were excluded, had
completed their revision of the Book of Common Prayer and presented it
to Parliament.

In considering the Bill for Uniformity, the House of Lords, where
Presbyterianism was powerfully represented, showed more regard for those
"tender consciences" to which the king (by the new Prayer Book called
for the first time "our most religious King") had referred in his Breda
Declaration than did the House of Commons. "The Book, the whole Book,
and nothing but the Book" was, in effect, the cry of the lower House,
and on the 19th of May, ten days after Marvell had left for the
Continent, the Act of Uniformity became law, and by the 24th of August
1662 all beneficed ministers and schoolmasters had to make the
celebrated subscription and profession, or go out into the wilderness.

There has always been a dispute as to the physical possibility of
perusing the compilation in question before the day fixed by the
Statute. The Book was advertised for sale in London on the 6th of
August, but how many copies were actually available on that day is not
known.

The Dean and Chapter of Peterborough did not get their copies until the
17th of August. When the new folios reached the lonely parsonages of
Cumberland and Durham--who would care to say? The Act required a verbal
avowal of "unfeigned assent and consent to all and everything contained
and prescribed in and by the Book of Common Prayer, and administrations
of the Sacraments and other rites and ceremonies of the Church according
to the use of the Church of England, together with the Psalter, and the
form of manner of making, ordaining, and consecrating Bishops, Priests,
and Deacons" to be made after the service upon "some Lord's day" before
the Feast of St. Bartholomew, _i.e._ the 24th of August 1662. The Act
also required subscription within the same time-limit to a declaration
of (_inter alia_) uniformity to the Liturgy of the Church of England "as
it is now by law established."

That this haste was indecent no layman is likely to dispute, but that it
wrought practical wrong is doubtful. The Vicar of Bray needed no time to
read his new Folio to enable him to make whatever avowal concerning it
the law demanded; and as for signing the declaration, all he required
for that purpose was pen and ink. Neither had the incumbent, who was a
good churchman at heart, any doubts to settle. He rejoiced to know that
his side was once more uppermost, and that it would be no longer
necessary for him, in order to retain his living, to pretend to tolerate
a Presbyterian, or to submit to read in his church the Directory of
Public Worship. Convocation had approved the new Prayer Book, which was
in substance the old one, and what more did any churchman require? As
for the Presbyterians and others who were in possession of livings, the
failure of the Savoy Conference must have made it plain to them that the
Church of England had not allowed the king to keep his word, that
compromise and comprehension had failed, and that if they were to remain
where they were, it could only be on terms of completely severing
themselves from all other Protestant bodies in the world, and becoming
thorough Episcopalians. No Presbyterian of any eminence was prepared to
make the statutory avowal. Painful as it always must be to give up any
good thing by a fixed date, it is hard to see what advantage would have
accrued from delay.

When the day came, some two thousand parsons were turned out of the
Church of England. Among them were included many of the most devout and
some of the most learned of our divines. Their "coming in" had been
irregular, their "going out" was painful.

Save so far as it turned these men out, the Act was a failure. It did
not procure that uniformity in the public worship of God which it
declared was so desirable; it prevented no scandal; it arrested no
decay; it allayed no distemper, and it certainly did not settle the
peace of the Church. Inside the Church the bishops were supine, the
parochial clergy indifferent, and the worshippers, if such a name can
properly be bestowed upon the congregations, were grossly irreverent.
Nor was any improvement in the conduct of the Church service noticeable
until after the Revolution, and when legislation had conceded a somewhat
shabby measure of toleration to those who by that time had become rigid,
traditional, and hereditary dissenters. Then indeed some attempts began
to be made to secure a real uniformity of ritual in the public worship
of the Church of England.[104:1] How far success has rewarded these
exertions it is not for me to say.

Marvell did not remain long at home after his return from Holland. A
strange adventure lay before him. He thus introduces it in a letter
dated 20th June 1663:--

   "GENTLEMEN, MY VERY WORTHY FRIENDS,--The relation I have to your
   affairs, and the intimacy of that affection I ow you, do both
   incline and oblige me to communicate to you, that there is a
   probability I may very shortly have occasion to go beyond sea; for
   my Lord of Carlisle being chosen by his Majesty, Embassadour
   Extraordinary to Muscovy, Sweden, and Denmarke, hath used his power,
   which ought to be very great with me, to make me goe along with him
   Secretary in those embassages. It is no new thing for Members of our
   House to be dispens'd with for the service of the King and Nation in
   forain parts. And you may be sure that I will not stirre without
   speciall leave of the House; that so you may be freed from any
   possibility of being importuned or tempted to make any other choice,
   in my absence. However, I can not but advise also with you, desiring
   to take your assent along with me, so much esteeme I have both of
   your prudence and friendship. The time allotted for the embassy is
   not much above a yeare: probably it may not be much less betwixt our
   adjournment and next meeting; and, however, you have Colonell Gilby,
   to whom my presence can make litle addition, so that if I cannot
   decline this voyage, I shall have the comfort to believe, that, all
   things considered, you cannot thereby receive any disservice. I
   shall hope to receive herein your speedy answer...."

What was the "power" Lord Carlisle had over Marvell is not now
discoverable, but the tie, whatever it may have been, was evidently a
close one.

A month after this letter Marvell started on his way.

   "GENTLEMEN, MY VERY WORTHY FRIENDS,--Being this day taking barge for
   Gravesend, there to embark for Archangel, so to Muscow, thence for
   Sweden, and last of all Denmarke; all of which I hope, by God's
   blessing, to finish within twelve moneths time: I do hereby, with my
   last and seriousest thoughts, salute you, rendring you all hearty
   thanks for your great kindnesse and friendship to me upon all
   occasions, and ardently beseeching God to keep you all in His
   gracious protection, to your own honour, and the welfare and
   flourishing of your Corporation, to which I am and shall ever
   continue a most affectionate and devoted servant. I undertake this
   voyage with the order and good liking of his Majesty, and by leave
   given me from the House and enterd in the Journal; and having
   received moreover your approbation, I go therefore with more ease
   and satisfaction of mind, and augurate to myselfe the happier
   successe in all my proceedings...."

It was Marvell's good fortune to be in Lord Carlisle's frigate which
made the voyage to Archangel in less than a month, sailing from
Gravesend on the 22nd of July and arriving at the bar of Archangel on
the 19th of August. The companion frigate took seven weeks to compass
the same distance.

Nothing of any importance attaches to this Russian embassy. It cost a
great deal of money, took up a great deal of time, exposed the
ambassador and his suite to much rudeness and discomfort, and failed to
effect its main object, which was to secure a renewal of the privileges
formerly enjoyed in Muscovy by British merchants.

One of the attendants upon the ambassador made a small book out of his
travels, which did not get printed till 1669, when it attracted little
notice. Mr. Grosart was the first of Marvell's many biographers to
discover the existence of this narrative.[106:1] He found it in the
first instance, to use his own language, "in one of good trusty John
Harris' folios of _Travels and Voyages_" (two vols. folio, 1705); but
later on he made the sad discovery that this "good trusty John Harris"
had uplifted what he called his "true and particular account" from the
book of 1669 without any acknowledgment. "For ways that are dark" the
old compiler of travels was not easily excelled, but why should Mr.
Grosart have gone out of his way to call an eighteenth-century
book-maker, about whom he evidently knew nothing, "good and trusty"?
Harris was never either the one or the other, and died a pauper!

A journey to Moscow in 1663-64 was no joke. Lord Carlisle, who was
accompanied by his wife and eldest son, although ready to start from
Archangel by the end of September, was doomed to spend both the 5th of
November and Christmas Day in the gloomy town of Vologda, which they had
reached, travelling by water, on the 17th of October. Some of this time
was spent in quarrelling as to who was to supply the sledges that were
required to convey the ambassador and all his _impedimenta_ along the
now ice-bound roads to Moscow. It was one of Marvell's many duties to
remonstrate with the authorities for their cruel and disrespectful
indifference; he did so with great freedom, but with no effect, and at
last the ambassador was obliged to hire two hundred sledges at his own
charges. Sixty he sent on ahead, following with one hundred and forty on
the 15th of January 1664. It was an intensely cold journey, and the
accommodation at night, with one happy exception, proved quite infamous.
On the 3rd of February Lord Carlisle and his _cortége_ found themselves
five versts from Moscow. The 5th of February was fixed for their entry
into the city in all their finery. They were ready on the morning of
that day, awaiting the arrival of the Tsar's escort, but it never came.
Lord Carlisle had sent his cooks on to Moscow to prepare the dinner he
expected to eat in his city-quarters. Nightfall approached, and it was
not till "half an hour before night" that the belated messengers
arrived, full of excuses. The ambassador was hungry, cold, and furious,
nor did his anger abate when told he was not to be allowed to enter
Moscow that night, as the Tsar and his ladies were very anxious to
enjoy the spectacle. The return of the cooks from Moscow and the
preparation of dinner, though a mitigation, was no cure for wounded
pride, and Lord Carlisle, calling Marvell to his side, and with his
assistance, concocted a letter in Latin to the Tsar, complaining
bitterly of their ill-treatment _inter fumosi gurgustii sordes et
angustias sine cibo aut potu_, and going so far as to assert that had
anything of the kind happened in England to a foreign ambassador, the
King of England would never have rested until the offence had been
atoned for with the blood of the criminals. When, some forty years
afterwards, Peter the Great asked Queen Anne to chop off the heads of
the rude men who had arrested his ambassador for debt, he had, perhaps,
Marvell's letter before him.

On the 6th of February Lord Carlisle and his suite made their public
entry into Moscow; but so long a time was occupied over the few versts
they had to travel, that it was dusk before the Kremlin was reached.

The formal reception of the ambassador was on the 11th of February.
Marvell was in the ambassador's sledge and carried his credentials upon
a yard of red damask. The titles of the Russian Potentate would, if
printed here, fill half a page. All the Russias, Great, Little, and
White, emperies more than one, dukedoms by the dozen, territories,
countries, and dominions--not all easy to identify on the map, and very
hard to pronounce--were read out in a loud voice by Marvell. At the end
of them came the homely title of the Earl and his offices, "his
Majesty's Lieutenant in the Counties of Cumberland and Westmorland."

The letters read and delivered, the Tsar and his Boyars rose in their
places simultaneously, and their tissue vests made so strange, loud, and
unexpected a noise as to provoke the ever too easily moved risibility
of the Englishmen.[109:1] When Marvell and the rest of them had ceased
from giggling, the Tsar inquired after the health of the king, but the
distance between his Imperial Majesty and Lord Carlisle being too great
for the question to carry, it had to be repeated by those who were
nearer the ambassador, who gravely replied that when he last saw his
master, namely on the 20th of July then last past, he was perfectly
well. To the same question as to the health of "the desolate widow of
Charles the First," Carlisle returned the same cautious answer. He then
read a very long speech in English, which his interpreter turned into
Russian. The same oration was rendered into Latin by Marvell, and
presented. Over Marvell's Latin trouble arose, for the Russians were
bent on taking and giving offence. Marvell had styled the Tsar
_Illustrissimus_ when he ought, so it was alleged, to have called him
_Serenissimus_. Marvell was not a schoolmaster's son, an old scholar of
Trinity, and Milton's assistant as Latin Secretary for nothing. He
prepared a reply which, as it does not lack humour, has a distinct
literary flavour, and is all that came of the embassy, may here be given
at length:--

   "I reply, saith he, that I sent no such paper into the
   Embassy-office, but upon the desire of his Tzarskoy Majesty's
   Councellor Evan Offonassy Pronchissof, I delivered it to him, not
   being a paper of State, nor written in the English Language wherein I
   treat, nor put into the hands of the near Boyars and Councellors of
   his Tzarskoy majesty, nor subscribed by my self, nor translated into
   Russe by my Interpreter, but only as a piece of curiosity, which is
   now restored me, and I am possessed of it; so that herein his
   Tzarskoy majestie's near Boyars and Councellors are doubtless ill
   grounded. But again I say concerning the value of the words
   _Illustrissimus_ and _Serenissimus_ compared together, seeing we must
   here from affaires of State, fall into Grammatical contests
   concerning the Latin tongue; that the word _Serenus_ signifieth
   nothing but still and calm; and, therefore, though of late times
   adopted into the Titles of great Princes by reason of that benigne
   tranquility which properly dwells in the majestick countenance of
   great Princes, and that venerable stillness of all the Attendants
   that surround them, of which I have seen an excellent example when I
   was in the presence of his Tzarskoy majesty, yet is more properly
   used concerning the calmness of the weather, or season. So that even
   the night is elegantly called _Serena_ by the best Authors, Cicero in
   Arato 12, Lucretius i. l. 29. '_Serena nox_'; and upon perusing again
   what I have writ in this paper, I finde that I have out of the
   customariness of that expression my self near the beginning said, And
   that most serene night, &c. Whereas on the contrary _Illustris_ in
   its proper derivation and signification expresseth that which is all
   resplendent, lightsome, and glorious, as well without as within, and
   that not with a secondary but with a primitive and original light.
   For if the Sun be, as he is, the first fountain of light, and Poets
   in their expressions (as is well known) are higher by much than those
   that write in Prose, what else is it when Ovid in the 2. of the
   Metamorphoses saith of Phoebus speaking with Phaëthon, _Qui terque
   quaterque concutiens Illustre caput_, and the Latin Orators, as
   Pliny, Ep. 139, when they would say the highest thing that can be
   exprest upon any subject, word it thus, _Nihil Illustrius dicere
   possum_. So that hereby may appear to his Tzarskoy Majestie's near
   Boyars and Counsellors what diminution there is to his Tzarskoy
   Majesty (which farr be it from my thoughts) if I appropriate
   _Serenissimus_ to my Master and _Illustrissimus_ to Him than which
   _nihil dici potest Illustrius_. But because this was in the time of
   the purity of the Latin tongue, when the word _Serenus_ was never
   used in the Title of any Prince or Person, I shall go on to deale
   with the utmost candor, forasmuch as in this Nation the nicety of
   that most eloquent language is not so perfectly understood, which
   gives occasion to these mistakes. I confess therefore that indeed in
   the declination of the Latin tongue, and when there scarce could be
   found out words enough to supply the modern ambition of Titles,
   Serenissimus as several other words hath grown in fashion for a
   compellation of lesser as well as greater Princes, and yet befits
   both the one and the other. So there is _Serenissima Respublica
   Veneta_, _Serenitates Electoriæ_, _Serenitates Regiæ_, even as the
   word Highness or _Celsitudo_ befits a Duke, a Prince, a King, or an
   Emperour, adjoyning to it the respective quality, and so the word
   _Illustris_. But suppose it were by modern use (which I deny)
   depressed from the undoubted superiority that it had of _Serenus_ in
   the purest antiquity, yet being added in the transcendent degree to
   the word Emperour, the highest denomination that a Prince is capable
   of, it becomes of the same value. So that to interpret
   _Illustrissimus_ unto diminution is to find a positive in a
   superlative, and in the most orient light to seek for darkness. And I
   would, seeing the near Boyars and Counsellors of his Tzarskoy Majesty
   are pleased to mention the Title given to his Tzarskoy Majesty by his
   Cesarian Majesty, gladly be satisfied by them, whether ever any
   Cesarian Majesty writ formerly hither in High-Dutch, and whether then
   they styled his Tzarskoy Majesty Durchluchtigste which is the same
   with _Illustrissimus_, and which I believe the Cæsar hath kept for
   Himself. But to cut short, his Royal Majesty hath used the word to
   his Tzarskoy Majesty in his Letter, not out of imitation of others,
   although even in the Dutch Letter to his Tzarskoy Majesty of 16 June
   1663, I finde Durchlauchtigste the same (as I said) with
   _Illustrissimus_, but out of the constant use of his own Court,
   further joyning before it Most High, Most Potent, and adding after it
   Great Lord Emperour, which is an higher Title than any Prince in the
   World gives his Tzarskoy Majesty, and as high a Title of honour as
   can be given to any thing under the Divinity. For the King my Master
   who possesses as considerable Dominions, and by as high and
   self-dependent a right as any Prince in the Universe, yet contenting
   Himself with the easiest Titles, and satisfying Himself in the
   essence of things, doth most willingly give to other Princes the
   Titles which are appropriated to them, but to the Tzarskoy Majesties
   of Russia his Royal Ancestors, and to his present Tzarskoy Majesty
   his Royal Majesty himself, have usually and do gladly pay Titles even
   to superfluity out of meer kindness. And upon that reason He added
   the word most Illustrious, and so did I use it in the Latin of my
   speech. Yet, that You may find I did not out of any criticisme of
   honor, but for distinction sake use it as I did, You may see in one
   place of the same speech _Serenitas_, speaking of his Tzarskoy
   Majesty: and I would have used _Serenissimus_ an hundred times
   concerning his Tzarskoy Majesty, had I thought it would have pleased
   Him better. And I dare promise You that his Majesty will upon the
   first information from me stile him _Serenissimus_, and I
   (notwithstanding what I have said) shall make little difficulty of
   altering the word in that speech, and of delivering it so to You,
   with that protestation that I have not in using that word
   _Illustrissimus_ erred nor used any diminution (which God forbid) to
   his Tzarskoy Majesty, but on the contrary after the example of the
   King my Master intended and shewed him all possible honor. And so God
   grant all happiness to His most high, most Potent, most Illustrious,
   and most Serene Tzarskoy Majesty, and that the friendship may daily
   increase betwixt His said Majesty and his most Serene Majesty my
   Master."

On the 19th of February the Tsar invited Lord Carlisle and his suite to
a dinner, which, beginning at two o'clock, lasted till eleven, when it
was prematurely broken up by the Tsar's nose beginning to bleed. Five
hundred dishes were served, but there were no napkins, and the
table-cloths only just covered the boards. There were Spanish wines,
white and red mead, Puaz and strong waters. The English ambassador was
not properly placed at table, not being anywhere near the Tsar, and his
faithful suite shared his resentment. Time went on, but no diplomatic
progress was made. The Tsar would not renew the privileges of the
British merchants; Easter was spent in Moscow, May also--and still
nothing was done. Carlisle, in a huff, determined to go away, and,
somewhat to the distress of his followers, refused to accept the costly
sables sent by the Tzar, not only to the ambassador, Lady Carlisle, and
Lord Morpeth, but to the secretaries and others. The Tzar thereupon
returned the plate which our king had sent him, which plate Lord
Carlisle seems to have appropriated, no doubt with diplomatic
correctness, as his perquisite in lieu of the sables; but the suite got
nothing.

The embassy left Moscow on the 24th of June for Novgorod and Riga, and
after visiting Stockholm and Copenhagen, Lord Carlisle and Marvell
reached London on the 30th of January 1665.

During Marvell's absence war had been declared with the Dutch. It was
never difficult to go to war with the Dutch. The king was always in want
of money, and as no proper check existed over war supplies, he took what
he wanted out of them. The merchants on 'Change desired war, saying that
the trade of the world was too little for both England and Holland, and
that one or the other "must down." The English manufacturers, who felt
the sting of their Dutch competitors, were always in favour of war. Then
the growing insolence of the Dutch in the Indies was not to be borne.
Stories were circulated how the Hollanders had proclaimed themselves
"Lords of the Southern Seas," and meant to deny English ships the right
of entry in that quarter of the globe. A baronet called on Pepys and
pulled out of his pocket letters from the East Indies, full of sad tales
of Englishmen having been actually thrashed inside their own factory at
Surat by swaggering Dutchmen, who had insulted the flag of St. George,
and swore they were going to be the masters "out there." Pepys, who
knew a little about the state of the royal navy, listened sorrowfully
and was content to hope that the war would not come until "we are more
ready for it."

In the House of Commons the prudent men were against the war, and were
at once accused of being in the pay of the Dutch. The king's friends
were all for the war, and nobody doubted that some of the money voted
for it would find its way into their pockets, or at all events that
pensions would reward their fidelity. A third group who favoured the war
were supposed to do so because their disloyalty and fanaticism always
disposed them to trouble the waters in which they wished to fish.

The war began in November 1664, and on the 24th of that month the king
opened Parliament and demanded money. He got it. Clarendon describes how
Sir Robert Paston from Norfolk, a back-bench man, "who was no frequent
speaker, but delivered what he had a mind to say very clearly," stood up
and proposed a grant of two and a half million pounds, to be spread over
three years. So huge a sum took the House by surprise. Nobody spoke;
"they sat in amazement." Somebody at last found his voice and moved a
much smaller sum, but no one seconded him. Sir Robert Paston ultimately
found supporters, "no man who had any relation to the Court speaking a
word." The Speaker put Sir Robert Paston's motion as the question, "and
the affirmative made a good sound, and very few gave their negative
aloud." But Clarendon adds, "it was notorious very many sat silent."

The war was not in its early stages unpopular, being for the control of
the sea, for the right of search, for the fishing trade, for mastery of
the "gorgeous East." The Admiralty had been busy, and a hundred
frigates, well gunned, were ready for the blue water by February 1665.
The Duke of York, who took the command, was a keen sailor, though his
unhappy notions as to patronage, and its exercise, were fatal to an
efficient service. On the 3rd of June the duke had his one victory; it
was off the roadstead of Harwich, and the roar of his artillery was
heard in Westminster. It was a fierce fight; the king's great friend,
Charles Berkeley, just made a peer and about to be made a duke, Lord
Muskerry and young Richard Boyle, all on the duke's ship the _Royal
Charles_, were killed by one shot, their blood and brains flying in the
duke's face. The Earls of Marlborough and Portland were killed. The
gallant Lawson, who rose from the ranks in Cromwell's time, an
Anabaptist and a Republican, but still in high command, received on
board his ship, the _Royal Oak_, a fatal wound. On the other side the
Dutch admiral, Opdam, was blown into the air with his ship and crew. The
Dutch fleet was scattered, and fled, after a loss estimated at
twenty-four ships and eight thousand men killed and wounded; England
lost no ship and but six hundred men.

The victory was not followed up. Some say the duke lost nerve. Tromp was
allowed to lead a great part of the fleet away in safety, and when the
great De Ruyter was recalled from the West Indies he was soon able to
assume the command of a formidable number of fighting craft.

In less than ten days after this great engagement the plague appeared in
London, a terrible and a solemnising affliction, lasting the rest of the
year. It was at its worst in September, when in one week more than seven
thousand died of it. The total number of its dead is estimated at
sixty-eight thousand five hundred and ninety-six.

On account of the plague Parliament was summoned to meet at Oxford in
October 1665.

Marvell must have reached Oxford in good time, for the Admission Book of
the Bodleian records his visit to the library on the last day of
September. His first letter from Oxford is dated 15th October, and in it
he tells the corporation that the House, "upon His Majesty's
representation of the necessity of further supplies in reference to the
Dutch War and probability of the French embracing their interests, hath
voted the King £1,250,000 additional to be levied in two years." The
king, who was the frankest of mortals in speech, though false as Belial
in action, told the House that he had already spent all the money
previously voted and must have more, especially if France was to prefer
the friendship of Holland to his. Amidst loud acclamations the money was
voted. The French ambassadors, who were in Oxford, saw for themselves
the temper of Parliament.

Notwithstanding the terrible plight of the capital, Oxford was gaiety
itself. The king was accompanied by his consort, who then was hopeful of
an heir, and also by Lady Castlemaine and Miss Stewart. Lady Castlemaine
did not escape the shaft of University wit, for a stinging couplet was
set up during the night on her door, for the discovery of the authorship
of which a reward of £1000 was offered. It may very well have been
Marvell's.[116:1]

The Duke of Monmouth gave a ball to the queen and her ladies, where,
after the queen's retirement, "Mrs. Stewart was extraordinary merry,"
and sang "French songs with great skill."[116:2]

Ten Acts of Parliament received the royal assent at Oxford, of which
but one is still remembered in certain quarters--the Five Mile Act,
which Marvell briefly describes as an Act "for debarring ejected
Nonconformists from living in or near Corporations (where they had
formerly pursued their callings), unless taking the new Oath and
Declaration." Parliament was prorogued at the end of October.

Another visitation of Providence was soon to befall the capital. On
Sunday morning, the 2nd of September, Pepys was aroused by one of his
maid-servants at 3 A.M. to look at a fire. He could not make out much
about it and went to bed again, but when he rose at seven o'clock it was
still burning, so he left his house and made his way to the Tower, from
whence he saw London Bridge aflame, and describes how the poor pigeons,
loth to leave their homes, fluttered about the balconies, until with
singed wings they fell into the flames. After gazing his fill he went to
Whitehall and had an interview with the king, who at once ordered his
barge and proceeded downstream to his burning City, and to the
assistance of a distracted Lord Mayor.

The fire raged four days, and made an end of old London, a picturesque
and even beautiful City. St. Paul's, both the church and the school, the
Royal Exchange, Ludgate, Fleet Street as far as the Inner Temple, were
by the 7th of the month smoking ruins. Four hundred streets, eighty-nine
churches (just a church an hour, so the curious noted), warehouses
unnumbered with all their varied contents, whole editions of books,
valuable and the reverse of valuable, were wiped out of existence. Rents
to an enormous amount ceased to be represented any longer by the houses
that paid them. How was the king to get his chimney-money? How were
merchants to meet their obligations? The parsons on Sunday, the 9th of
September, ought to have had no difficulty in finding texts for their
sermons. Pepys went to church twice, but without edification, and
certainly Dean Harding, whom he heard complaining in the evening "that
the City had been reduced from a folio to a duo decimo," hardly rose to
the dignity of the occasion.

Strange to say, not a life was actually lost in the fire,[118:1] though
some old Londoners (among them Edmund Calamy's grandfather) died of
grief, and others (and among them Shirley the dramatist and his wife)
from exposure and exhaustion. One hysterical foreigner, who insisted
that he lit the flame, was executed, though no sensible man believed
what he said. It was long the boast of the merchants of London that no
one of their number "broke" in consequence of the great fire.

Unhappily the belief was widespread, as that "tall bully," the monument,
long testified, that the fire was the work of the Roman Catholics, and
aliens, suspected of belonging to our old religion, found it dangerous
to walk the streets whilst the embers still smoked, which they continued
to do for six months.

The meeting of Parliament was a little delayed in consequence of this
national disaster, and when it did meet at the end of the month, Marvell
reports the appointment of two Committees, one "about the Fire of
London," and the other "to receive informations of the insolence of the
Popish priests and Jesuits, and of the increase of Popery." The latter
Committee almost at once reported to the House, to quote from Marvell's
letter of the 27th of October, "that his Majesty be desired to issue out
his proclamation that all Popish priests and Jesuits, except such as not
being natural-born subjects, or belong to the Queen Mother and Queen
Consort, be banished in thirty days or else the law be executed upon
them, that all Justices of Peace and officers concerned put the laws in
execution against Papists and suspected Papists in order to their
execution, and that all officers, civil or military, not taking the
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance within twenty days be displaced."

In a very real sense the great fire of London continued to smoke for
many a weary year, and to fill the air with black suspicions and civil
discord.

Parliament had not sat long before it was discovered that a change had
taken place in its temper and spirit. The plague and the fire had
contributed to this change. The London clergy had not exhibited great
devotion during the former affliction. Many of the incumbents deserted
their flocks, and their empty pulpits had been filled by zealots, who
preached "Woe unto Jerusalem." The profligacy of the Court, and the
general decay of manners, when added to the severity of the legislation
against the Nonconformists, gave the ejected clergy opportunities for a
renewal of their spiritual ministrations, and as usual their labours,
_pro salute animarum_, aroused political dissatisfaction. Some of the
more outrageous supporters of the royal prerogative, the renegade May
among them, professed to see in the fire a punishment upon the spirit of
freedom, for which the City had once been famous, and urged the king not
to suffer it to be rebuilt again "to be a bit in his mouth and a bridle
upon his neck, but to keep it all open," and that his troops might enter
whenever he thought necessary, "there being no other way to govern that
rude multitude but by force."

Rabid nonsense of this kind had no weight with the king, who never
showed his native good sense more conspicuously than in the pains he
took over the rebuilding of London; but none the less it had its effect
in getting rid once and for ever of that spirit of excessive (besotted
is Hallam's word) loyalty which had characterised the Restoration.

The king, of course, wanted money, nor was Parliament disposed to refuse
it, we being still at war with Holland; but to the horror of that
elderly pedant, Lord Clarendon, the Commons passed a Bill appointing a
commission of members of both Houses "to inspect"--I am now quoting
Marvell--"and examine thoroughly the former expense of the £2,800,000,
of the £1,250,000 of the Militia money, of the prize goods, etc." In an
earlier letter Marvell attributes the new temper of Parliament, "not to
any want of ardour to supply the public necessities, but out of our
House's sense also of the burden to be laid upon the subject." Clarendon
was so alarmed that he advised a dissolution. Charles was alarmed, too,
knowing well that both Carteret, the Treasurer of the Navy, and Lord
Ashley, the Treasurer of the Prize Money, issued out many sums upon the
king's warrant, for which no accounts could be produced, but he was
still more frightened of a new Parliament. In the present Parliament he
had, so Clarendon admits, "a hundred members of his own menial servants
and their near relations." The bishops were also against a dissolution,
dreading the return of Presbyterian members, so Clarendon's advice was
not followed, and the king very reluctantly consented to the commission,
about which Pepys has so much to say. It did not get appointed at once,
but when it did Pepys rejoices greatly that its secretary, Mr. Jessopp,
was "an old fashioned Cromwell man"; in other words, both honest and
efficient.

The shrewd Secretary of the Navy Office here puts his finger on the
real plague-spot of the Restoration. Our Puritan historians write rather
loosely about "the floodgates of dissipation," etc., having been flung
open by that event as if it had wrought a sudden change in human nature.
Mr. Pepys, whose frank Diary begins during the Protectorate, underwent
no such change. He was just the same sinner under Cromwell as he was
under Charles. Sober, grave divines may be found deploring the growing
profligacy of the times long before the 29th of May 1660. An era of
extravagance was evidently to be expected. No doubt the king's return
assisted it. No country could be anything but the worse for having
Charles the Second as its "most religious King." The Restoration of the
Stuarts was the best "excuse for a glass" ever offered to an Englishman.
He availed himself of it with even more than his accustomed freedom. But
it cannot be said that the king's debauchery was ever approved of even
in London. Both the mercurial Pepys and the grave Evelyn alike deplore
it. The misfortune clearly attributable to the king's return was the
substitution of a corrupt, inefficient, and unpatriotic administration
for the old-fashioned servants of the public whom Cromwell had gathered
round him.

Parliament was busy with new taxes. In November 1666 Marvell writes:--

   "The Committee has prepared these votes. All persons shall pay one
   shilling per poll, all aliens two, all Nonconformists and papists
   two, all servants one shilling in the pound of their wages, all
   personal estates shall pay for so much as is not already taxed by the
   land-tax, after twenty shillings in the hundred. Cattle, corn, and
   household furniture shall be excepted, and all such stock-in-trade as
   is already taxed by the land-tax, but the rest to be liable."

Stringent work! Later on we read:--

   "Three shillings in the pound for all offices and public employments,
   except military; lawyers and physicians proportionate to their
   practice."

Here is the income-tax long before Mr. Pitt.

The House of Lords, trembling on the verge of a breach of privilege,
altered this Poll Bill. Marvell writes in January 1667:--

   "We have not advanced much this week; the alterations of the Lords
   upon the Poll Bill have kept us busy. We have disagreed in most.
   Aliens we adhere to pay double. Nonconformists we agree with them
   _not_ to pay double (126 to 91), to allow no exemptions from patents
   to free from paying, we adhere; and we also rejected a long clause
   whereby they as well as the Commoners pretend distinctly to give to
   the King, and to-day we send up our reasons."

The Lords agreed, and the Bill passed.

Ireland supplied a very stormy measure. I am afraid Marvell was on the
wrong side, but owing to his reserve I am not sure. An Irish Cattle Bill
was a measure very popular in the House of Commons, its object being to
prevent Ireland from sending over live beasts to be fattened, killed,
and consumed in England. You can read all about it in Clarendon's _Life_
(vol. iii. pp. 704-720, 739), and think you are reading about Canadian
cattle to-day. The breeders (in a majority) were on one side, and the
owners of pasture-land on the other. The breeders said the Irish cattle
were bred in Ireland for nothing and transported for little, that they
undersold the English-bred cattle, and consequently "the breed of Cattle
in the Kingdom was totally given over," and rents fell. Other members
contended in their places "that their countries had no land bad enough
to breed, and that their traffic consisted in buying lean cattle and
making them fat, and upon this they paid their rent." Nobody, except the
king, gave a thought to Ireland. He, in this not unworthy of his great
Tudor predecessor, Henry the Eighth, declared he was King of Ireland no
less than of England, and would do nothing to injure one portion of his
dominions for the benefit of another. But as usual he gave way, being in
great straits for money. The House of Lords was better disposed towards
Ireland than the House of Commons, but they too yielded to selfish
clamour, and the Bill, which had excited great fury, became law, and
proved ineffective, owing (as was alleged) to that corruption which
restrictions on trade seem to have the trick of breeding.[123:1]

It is always agreeable to be reminded that however large a part of our
history is composed of the record of passion, greed, delusion, and
stupidity, yet common-sense, the love of order and of justice (in
matters of business), have usually been the predominant factors in our
national life, despite priest, merchant, and party.

Nowhere is this better illustrated than by two measures to which Marvell
refers as Bills "for the prevention of lawsuits between landlord and
tenant" and for "the Rebuilding of London." Both these Bills became law
in February 1668, within five months of the great catastrophe that was
their occasion. Two more sensible, well-planned, well-drawn, courageous
measures were never piloted through both Houses. King, Lords and
Commons, all put their heads together to face a great emergency and to
provide an immediate remedy.

The Bill to prevent lawsuits is best appreciated if we read its
preamble:--

   "Whereas the greatest part of the houses in the City of London having
   been burnt by the dreadful and dismal fire which happened in
   September last, many of the Tenants, under-tenants, and late
   occupiers are liable unto suits and actions to compel them to repair
   and to rebuild the same, and to pay their rents as if the same had
   not been burnt, and are not relievable therefor in any ordinary
   course of law; and great differences are likely to arise concerning
   the Repairs and rebuilding the said houses, and payment of rents
   which, if they should not be determined with speed and without
   charge, would much obstruct the rebuilding of the s^d City. And for
   that it is just that everyone concerned should bear a proportionate
   share of this loss according to their several interests wherein in
   respect of the multitude of cases, varying in their circumstances, no
   certain general rule can be prescribed."

After this recital it was enacted that the judges of the King's Bench
and Common Pleas and the Barons of the Exchequer, or any three or more
of them, should form a Court of Record to hear and determine every
possible dispute or difference arising out of the great fire, whether
relating to liability to repair, and rebuild, or to pay rent, or for
arrears of rent (other than arrears which had accrued due before the 1st
of September) or otherwise howsoever. The proceedings were to be by
summary process, _sine forma et figura judicii_ and without court fees.
The judges were to be bound by no rules either of law or equity, and
might call for what evidence they chose, including that of the
interested parties, and try the case as it best could be tried. Their
orders were to be final and not (save in a single excepted case) subject
to any appeal. All persons in remainder and reversion were to be bound
by these orders, although infants, married women, idiots, beyond seas,
or under any other disability. A special power was given to order the
surrender of existing leases, and to grant new ones for terms not
exceeding forty years. The judges gave their services for nothing, and,
for once, released from all their own trammels, set to work to do
substantial justice between landlord and tenant, personalty and realty,
the life interest and the remainder, covenantor and covenantee, after a
fashion which excited the admiration and won the confidence of the whole
City. The ordinary suitor, still left exposed to the pitfalls of the
special pleader, the risks (owing to the exclusion of evidence) of a
non-suit and the costly cumbersomeness of the Court of Chancery, must
often have wished that the subject-matter of his litigation had perished
in the flames of the great fire.

This court sat in Clifford's Inn, and was usually presided over by Sir
Matthew Hale, whose skill both as an arithmetician and an architect
completed his fitness for so responsible a position. Within a year the
work was done.

The Act for rebuilding the City is an elaborate measure of more than
forty clauses, and aimed at securing "the regularity, safety,
conveniency and beauty" of the new London that was to be. The buildings
were classified according to their position and character, and had to
maintain a prescribed level of quality. The materials to be employed
were named. New streets were to be of certain widths, and so on. This is
the Act that contains the first Betterment Clause: "And forasmuch as the
Houses now remaining and to be rebuilt will receive more or less
advantage in the value of the rents by the liberty of air and free
recourse for trade," it was enacted that a jury might be sworn to
assess upon the owners and others interested of and in the said houses,
such sum or sums of money with respect of their several interests "in
consideration of such improvement and melioration as in reason and good
conscience they shall think fit."

It takes nothing short of a catastrophe to suspend in England, even for
a few months, those rules of evidence that often make justice
impossible, and those rights of landlords which for centuries have
appropriated public expenditure to private gain.[126:1]

The moneys required to pay for the land taken under the Act to widen
streets and to accomplish the other authorised works were raised, as
Marvell informs his constituents, by a tax of twelve pence on every
chaldron of coal coming as far as Gravesend. Few taxes have had so
useful and so harmless a life.

All this time the Dutch War was going on, but the heart was out of it.
Nothing in England is so popular as war, except the peace that comes
after it. The king now wanted peace, and the merchants on 'Change had
glutted their ire. In February 1667 the king told the Houses of
Parliament that all "sober" men would be glad to see peace. Unluckily,
it seems to have been assumed that we could have peace whenever we
wanted it, and the fatal error was committed of at once "laying up" the
first-and second-rate ships. It thus came about that, whilst still at
war, England had no fleet to put to sea. It did not at first seem likely
that the overtures for peace would present much difficulty, when
suddenly arose the question of Poleroone. It is amazing how few
Englishmen have ever heard of Poleroone, or even of the Banda Islands,
of which group it is one. Indeed, a more insignificant speck in the
ocean it would be hard to find. To discover it on an atlas is no easy
task. Yet, but for Poleroone, the Dutch would never have taken
Sheerness, or broken the chain at Gillingham, or carried away with them
to the Texel the proud vessel that had brought back Charles the Second
to an excited population.

Poleroone is a small nutmeg-growing island in the Indian Archipelago,
not far from the eastern extremity of New Guinea. King James the First
imagined he had some right to it, and, at any rate, Oliver Cromwell,
when he made peace with the Dutch, made a great point of Poleroone. Have
it he would for the East India Company. The Dutch objected, but gave
way, and by an article in the treaty with Oliver bound themselves to
give up Poleroone to the Company. All, in fact, that they did do, was to
cut down the nutmeg trees, and so make the island good for nothing for
many a long year. Physical possession was never taken. For some
unaccountable reason Charles, who had sold Oliver's Dunkirk to the
French for half a million of money, stuck out for Poleroone. What
Cromwell had taken he was not going to give up! On the other hand,
neither would the Dutch give up Poleroone. This dispute, about a barren
island, delayed the settlement of the peace preliminaries; but
eventually the British plenipotentiaries did get out to Breda, in May
1667. Our sanguine king expected an immediate cessation of hostilities,
and that his unpreparedness would thus be huddled up. All of a sudden,
at the beginning of June, De Ruyter led out his fleet, and with a fair
wind behind him stood for the Thames. All is fair in war. England was
caught napping. The doleful history reads like that of a sudden
piratical onslaught, and reveals the fatal inefficiency of the
administration. Sheerness was practically defenceless. "There were a
Company or two of very good soldiers there under excellent officers, but
the fortifications were so weak and unfinished, and all other provisions
so entirely wanting, that the Dutch Fleet no sooner approached within a
distance but with their cannon they beat all the works flat and drove
all the men from the ground, which, as soon as they had done with their
Boats, they landed men and seemed resolved to fortify and keep
it."[128:1] Capture of Sheerness by the Dutch! No need of a halfpenny
press to spread this news through a London still in ruins. What made
matters worse, the sailors were more than half-mutinous, being paid with
tickets not readily convertible into cash. Many of them actually
deserted to the Dutch fleet, which made its leisurely way upstream,
passing Upnor Castle, which had guns but no ammunition, till it was
almost within reach of Chatham, where lay the royal navy. General Monk,
who was the handy man of the period, and whose authority was always
invoked when the king he had restored was in greater trouble than usual,
had hastily collected what troops he could muster, and marched to
protect Chatham; but what were wanted were ships, not troops. The Dutch
had no mind to land, and after firing three warships (the _Royal James_,
the _Royal Oak_, and the _London_), and capturing the _Royal Charles_,
"they thought they had done enough, and made use of the ebb to carry
them back again."[129:1] These events occupied the tenth to the
fifteenth of June, and for the impression they produced on Marvell's
mind we are not dependent upon his restrained letters to his
constituents, but can turn to his longest rhymed satire, which is
believed to have been first printed, anonymously of course, as a
broadsheet in August 1667.

This poem is called _The Last Instructions to a Painter about the Dutch
Wars_, 1667. The title was derived from Waller's panegyric poem on the
occasion of the Duke of York's victory over the Dutch on the 3rd of June
1665, when Opdam, the Dutch admiral, was blown up with his ship.[129:2]
Sir John Denham, a brother satirist of Marvell's, and with as good an
excuse for hating the Duke of York as this world affords, had seized
upon the same idea and published four satirical poems on these same
Dutch Wars, entitled _Directions to a Painter_ (see _Poems on Affairs of
State_, 1703, vol. i.).

Marvell's satire, which runs to 900 lines, is essentially a House of
Commons poem, and could only have been written by a member. It is
intensely "lobbyish" and "occasional." To understand its allusions, to
appreciate its "pain-giving" capacity to the full, is now impossible.
Still, the reader of Clarendon's _Life_, Pepys's _Diary_, and Burnet's
_History_, to name only popular books, will have no difficulty in
entering into the spirit of the performance. As a poem it is rough in
execution, careless, breathless. A rugged style was then in vogue. Even
Milton could write his lines to the Cambridge Carrier somewhat in this
manner. Marvell has nothing of the magnificence of Dryden, or of the
finished malice of Pope. He plays the part, and it is sincerely played,
of the old, honest member of Parliament who loves his country and hates
rogues and speaks right out, calling spades spades and the king's women
what they ought to be called. He is conversational, and therefore
coarse. The whole history of the events that resulted in the national
disgrace is told.

    "The close cabal marked how the Navy eats
    And thought all lost that goes not to the cheats;
    So therefore secretly for peace decrees,
    Yet for a War the Parliament would squeeze,
    And fix to the revenue such a sum
    Should Goodricke silence and make Paston dumb.
    ...
    Meantime through all the yards their orders were
    To lay the ships up, cease the keels begun.
    The timber rots, the useless axe does rust,
    The unpractised saw lies buried in the dust,
    The busy hammer sleeps, the ropes untwine."

Parliament is got rid of to the joy of Clarendon.

    "Blither than hare that hath escaped the hounds,
    The house prorogued, the chancellor rebounds.
    What frosts to fruits, what arsenic to the rat,
    What to fair Denham mortal chocolate,[130:1]
    What an account to Carteret, that and more,
    A parliament is to the chancellor."

De Ruyter makes his appearance, and Monk

          "in his shirt against the Dutch is pressed.
    Often, dear Painter, have I sat and mused
    Why he should be on all adventures used.
    Whether his valour they so much admire,
    Or that for cowardice they all retire,
    As heaven in storms, they call, in gusts of state,
    On Monk and Parliament--yet both do hate.
    ...
    Ruyter, the while, that had our ocean curbed,
    Sailed now amongst our rivers undisturbed;
    Surveyed their crystal streams and banks so green,
    And beauties ere this never naked seen."

His flags fly from the topmasts of his ships, but where is the enemy?

    "So up the stream the Belgic navy glides,
    And at Sheerness unloads its stormy sides."

Chatham was but a few miles further up.

    "There our sick ships unrigged in summer lay,
    Like moulting fowl, a weak and easy prey,
    For whose strong bulk earth scarce could timber find,
    The ocean water, or the heavens wind.
    Those oaken giants of the ancient race,
    That ruled all seas, and did our channel grace;
    The conscious stag, though once the forest's dread,
    Flies to the wood, and hides his armless head.
    Ruyter forthwith a squadron doth untack;
    They sail securely through the river's track.
    An English pilot too (O, shame! O, sin!)
    Cheated of 's pay, was he that showed them in."

The chain at Gillingham is broken, to the dismay of Monk, who

            "from the bank that dismal sight does view;
    Our feather gallants, who came down that day
    To be spectators safe of the new play,
    Leave him alone when first they hear the gun,
    (Cornbury,[131:1] the fleetest) and to London run.
    Our seamen, whom no danger's shape could fright,
    Unpaid, refuse to mount their ships for spite,
    Or to their fellows swim on board the Dutch,
    Who show the tempting metal in their clutch."

Upnor Castle avails nought.

    "And Upnor's Castle's ill-deserted wall
    Now needful does for ammunition call."

The _Royal Charles_ is captured before Monk's face.

    "That sacred Keel that had, as he, restored
    Its excited sovereign on its happy board,
    Now a cheap spoil and the mean victor's slave
    Taught the Dutch colours from its top to wave."

Horrors accumulate.

    "Each doleful day still with fresh loss returns,
    The loyal _London_ now a third time burns,
    And the true _Royal Oak_ and _Royal James_,
    Allied in fate, increase with theirs her flames.
    Of all our navy none shall now survive,
    But that the ships themselves were taught to dive,
    And the kind river in its creek them hides.
    Freighting their pierced keels with oozy tides."

The situation was indeed serious enough. One wiseacre in command in
London declared his belief that the Tower was no longer "tenable."

    "And were not Ruyter's maw with ravage cloyed,
    Even London's ashes had been then destroyed."

But the Dutch admiral returns the way he came.

    "Now nothing more at Chatham's left to burn,
    The Holland squadron leisurely return;
    And spite of Ruperts and of Albemarles,
    To Ruyter's triumph led the captive _Charles_.
    The pleasing sight he often does prolong,
    Her mast erect, tough cordage, timber strong,
    Her moving shape, all these he doth survey,
    And all admires, but most his easy prey.
    The seamen search her all within, without;
    Viewing her strength, they yet their conquest doubt;
    Then with rude shouts, secure, the air they vex,
    With gamesome joy insulting on her decks.
    Such the feared Hebrew captive, blinded, shorn,
    Was led about in sport, the public scorn."

The poet then indulges himself in an emotional outburst.

    "Black day, accursed! on thee let no man hail
    Out of the port, or dare to hoist a sail,
    Or row a boat in thy unlucky hour!
    Thee, the year's monster, let thy dam devour,
    And constant Time, to keep his course yet right,
    Fill up thy space with a redoubled night.
    When agèd Thames was bound with fetters base,
    And Medway chaste ravished before his face,
    And their dear offspring murdered in their sight,
    Thou and thy fellows saw the odious light.
    Sad change, since first that happy pair was wed,
    When all the rivers graced their nuptial bed;
    And father Neptune promised to resign
    His empire old to their immortal line;
    Now with vain grief their vainer hopes they rue,
    Themselves dishonoured, and the gods untrue;
    And to each other, helpless couple, moan,
    As the sad tortoise for the sea does groan:
    But most they for their darling Charles complain,
    And were it burned, yet less would be their pain.
    To see that fatal pledge of sea-command,
    Now in the ravisher De Ruyter's hand,
    The Thames roared, swooning Medway turned her tide,
    And were they mortal, both for grief had died."

A scapegoat had, of course, to be at once provided. He was found in Mr.
Commissioner Pett, the most skilful shipbuilder of the age.

    "After this loss, to relish discontent,
    Some one must be accused by Parliament.
    All our miscarriages on Pett must fall,
    His name alone seems fit to answer all.
    Whose counsel first did this mad war beget?
    Who all commands sold through the navy? Pett.
    Who would not follow when the Dutch were beat?
    Who treated out the time at Bergen? Pett.
    Who the Dutch fleet with storms disabled met?
    And, rifling prizes, them neglect? Pett.
    Who with false news prevented the Gazette?
    The fleet divided? writ for Rupert? Pett.
    Who all our seamen cheated of their debt,
    And all our prizes who did swallow? Pett.
    Who did advise no navy out to set?
    And who the forts left unprepared? Pett.
    Who to supply with powder did forget
    Languard, Sheerness, Gravesend, and Upnor? Pett.
    Who all our ships exposed in Chatham net?
    Who should it be but the fanatic Pett?"

This outburst can hardly fail to remind the reader of a famous outburst
of Mr. Micawber's on the subject of Uriah Heep.

The satire concludes with the picture of the king in the dead shades of
night, alone in his room, startled by loud noises of cannons, trumpets,
and drums, and then visited by the ghost of his father.

    "And ghastly Charles, turning his collar low,
    The purple thread about his neck does show."

The pensive king resolves on Clarendon's disgrace, and on rising next
morning seeks out Lady Castlemaine, Bennet, and Coventry, who give him
the same advice. He knows them all three to be false to one another and
to him, but is for the moment content to do what they wish.

I have omitted, in this review of a long poem, the earlier lines which
deal with the composition of the House of Commons. All its parties are
described, one after another--the old courtiers, the pension-hunters,
the king's procurers, then almost a department of State.

    "Then the Procurers under Prodgers filed
    Gentlest of men, and his lieutenant mild
    Bronkard, love's squire; through all the field arrayed,
    No troop was better clad, nor so well paid."

Clarendon had his friends, soon sorely to be needed, and after them,

    "Next to the lawyers, sordid band, appear,
    Finch in the front and Thurland in the rear."

Some thirty-three members are mentioned by their names and habits. The
Speaker, Sir Edward Turner, is somewhat unkindly described. Honest men
are usually to be found everywhere, and they existed even in Charles the
Second's pensionary Parliament:--

    "Nor could all these the field have long maintained
    But for the unknown reserve that still remained;
    A gross of English gentry, nobly born,
    Of clear estates, and to no faction sworn,
    Dear lovers of their king, and death to meet
    For country's cause, that glorious thing and sweet;
    To speak not forward, but in action brave,
    In giving generous, but in council grave;
    Candidly credulous for once, nay twice;
    But sure the devil cannot cheat them thrice."

No member of Parliament's library is complete without Marvell, who did
not forget the House of Commons smoking-room:--

    "Even iron Strangways chafing yet gave back
    Spent with fatigue, to breathe awhile tabac."

Charles hastened to make peace with Holland. He was not the man to
insist on vengeance or to mourn over lost prestige. De Ruyter had gone
after suffering repulses at Portsmouth, Plymouth, and Torbay. Peace was
concluded at Breda on the 21st of July. We gave up Poleroone. _Per
contra_ we gained a more famous place, New Amsterdam, rechristened New
York in honour of the duke. All prisoners were to be liberated, and the
Dutch, despite Sheerness and the _Royal Charles_, agreed to lower their
flag to all British ships of war.

The fall, long pending, of Clarendon immediately followed the peace.
Men's tempers were furious or sullen. Hyde had no more bitter, no more
cruel enemy than Marvell. Why this was has not been discovered, but
there was nothing too bad for Marvell not to believe of any member of
Clarendon's household. All the scandals, and they were many and
horrible, relating to Clarendon and his daughter, the Duchess of York,
find a place in Marvell's satires and epigrams. To us Lord Clarendon is
a grave and thoughtful figure, the statesman-author of _The History of
the Rebellion and Civil Wars in England_, that famous, large book,
loftily planned, finely executed, full of life and character and the
philosophy of human existence; and of his own _Autobiography_, a
production which, though it must, like Burnet's _History_, be read with
caution, unveils to the reader a portion of that past which usually is
as deeply shrouded from us as the future. If at times we are reminded in
reading Clarendon's _Life_ of the old steward in Hogarth's plate, who
lifts up his hands in horror over the extravagance of his master, if his
pedantry often irritates, and his love of place displeases, we recognise
these but as the shades of the character of a distinguished and
accomplished public servant. But to Marvell Clarendon was rapacious,
ambitious, and corrupt, a man who had sold Oliver's Dunkirk to the
French, and shared the price; who had selected for the king's consort a
barren woman, so that his own damaged daughter might at least chance to
become Queen of England, who hated Parliaments and hankered after a
standing army, who took money for patents, who sold public offices, who
was bribed by the Dutch about the terms of peace, who swindled the
ruined cavaliers of the funds subscribed for their benefit, and had by
these methods heaped together great wealth which he ostentatiously
displayed. Even darker crimes than these are hinted at. That Marvell was
wrong in his estimate of Clarendon's character now seems certain;
Clarendon did not get a penny of the Dunkirk money. The case made
against him by the House of Commons in their articles of impeachment was
felt even at the time to be flimsy and incapable of proof, and in the
many records that have come to light since Clarendon's day nothing has
been discovered to give them support. And yet Marvell was a singularly
well-informed member of Parliament, a shrewd, level-headed man of
affairs, who knew Lord Clarendon in the way we know men we have to see
on business matters, whose speeches we can listen to, and whose conduct
we discuss and criticise. "Gently scan your brother-man" is a precept
Marvell never took to heart; nor is the House of Commons a place where
it is either preached or practised.

When Clarendon was well nigh at the height of his great unpopularity, he
built himself a fine big house on a site given him by the king where now
is Albemarle Street. Where did he get the money from? He employed, in
building it, the stones of St. Paul's Cathedral. True, he bought the
stones from the Dean and Chapter, but if the man you hate builds a great
house out of the ruins of a church, is it likely that so trivial a fact
as a cash payment for the materials is going to be mentioned? Splendid
furniture and noble pictures were to be seen going into the new
palace--the gifts, so it was alleged, of foreign ambassadors. What was
the consideration for these donations? England's honour! Clarendon House
was at once named Dunkirk House, Holland House, Tangiers House.

Here is Marvell upon it:--

    UPON HIS HOUSE

    "Here lie the sacred bones
    Of Paul beguilèd of his stones:
    Here lie golden briberies,
    The price of ruined families;
    The cavalier's debenture wall,
    Fixed on an eccentric basis:
    Here's Dunkirk-Town and Tangier-Hull,
    The Queen's marriage and all,
    The Dutchman's _templum pacis_."

Clarendon's fall was rapid. He knew the house of Stuart too well to
place any reliance upon the king. Evelyn visited him on the 27th of
August 1667 after the seals had been taken away from him, and found him
"in his bed-chamber very sad." His enemies were numerous and powerful,
both in the House of Commons and at Court, where all the buffoons and
ladies of pleasure hated him, because--so Evelyn says--"he thwarted some
of them and stood in their way." In November Evelyn called again and
found the late Lord-Chancellor in the garden of his new-built palace,
sitting in his gout wheel-chair and watching the new gates setting up
towards the north and the fields. "He looked and spoke very
disconsolately. After some while deploring his condition to me, I took
my leave. Next morning I heard he was gone."[139:1]

The news was true; on Saturday, the 29th of November, he drove to Erith,
and after a terrible tossing on the nobly impartial Channel the weary
man reached Calais, and died seven years later in Rouen, having well
employed his leisure in completing his history. His palace was sold for
half what it cost to the inevitable Monk, Duke of Albemarle.

On the 3rd of December Marvell writes that the House, having heard that
Lord Clarendon had "withdrawn," forthwith ordered an address to his
Majesty "that care might be taken for securing all the sea ports lest he
should pass there." Marvell adds grimly, "I suppose he will not trouble
you at Hull." The king took good care that his late Lord-Chancellor
should escape. An act of perpetual banishment was at once passed,
receiving the royal assent on the 19th of December.

Marvell was kept very busy during the early months of 1668, inquiring,
as our English fashion is, into the "miscarriages of the late war." The
House more than once sat from nine in the morning till eight at night,
finding out all it could. "What money, arising by the poll money, had
been applied to the use of the war?" This was an awkward inquiry. The
House voted that the not prosecuting the first victory of June 1665 was
a miscarriage, and one of the greatest: a snub to the Duke of York. The
not furnishing the Medway with a sufficient guard of ships, though the
king had then 18,000 men in his pay, was another great miscarriage. The
paying of the fleet with tickets, without money, was a third great
miscarriage. All this time Oliver Cromwell's skull was grinning on its
perch in Westminster Hall.

Besides the honour of England, that of Hull had to be defended by its
member. A young Lieutenant Wise, one of the Hull garrison, had in some
boisterous fashion affronted the corporation and the mayor. On this
correspondence ensues; and Marvell waits upon the Duke of Albemarle, the
head of the army, to obtain reparation.

   "I waited yesterday upon my Lord General--and first presented your
   usual fee which the General accepted, but saying that it was
   unnecessary and that you might have bin pleased to spare it, and he
   should be so much more at liberty to show how voluntary and
   affectionate he was toward your corporation. I returned the civilest
   words I could coin on for the present, and rendered him your humble
   thanks for his continued patronage of you ... and told him that you
   had further sent him up a small tribute of your Hull liquor. He
   thanked you again for all these things which you might--he said--have
   spared, and added that if the greatest of your military officers
   should demean himself ill towards you, he would take a course with
   him."

A mealy-mouthed Lord-General drawing near his end.[140:1]

Wise was removed from the Hull garrison. The affronted corporation was
not satisfied, and Marvell had to argue the point.

   "And I hope, Sir, you will incline the Bench to consider whether I am
   able or whether it be fit for me to urge it beyond that point. Yet it
   is not all his (Wise's) Parliament men and relations that have
   wrought me in the least, but what I simply conceive as the state of
   things now to be possible and satisfactory. What would you have more
   of a soldier than to run away and have him cashiered as to any
   command in your garrison? The first he hath done and the second he
   must submit to. And I assure you whatsoever he was among you, he is
   here a kind of decrepit young gentleman and terribly crest-fallen."

The letter concludes thus:--

   "For I assure you they use all the civility imaginable to you, and as
   we sat there drinking a cup of sack with the General, Colonel
   Legge[141:1] chancing to be present, there were twenty good things
   said on all hands tending to the good fame, reputation, and advantage
   of the Town, an occasion that I was heartily glad of."

Corporations may not have souls to save and bodies to kill, but
evidently they have vanities to tickle.

In November 1669 the House is still busy over the accounts. Sir George
Carteret was Treasurer of the Navy. Marvell refers to him in _The Last
Instructions to a Painter_ as:--

    "Carteret the rich did the accountants guide
    And in ill English all the world defied."

The following letter of Marvell's gives an excellent account of House of
Commons business, both how it is conducted, and how often it gets
accidentally interrupted by other business unexpectedly cropping up:--

                                                 "_November 20, 1669._

   "GENTLEMEN, MY VERY WORTHY FRIENDS,--Returning after our adjournment
   to sit upon Wednesday, the House having heard what Sir G. Cartaret
   could say for himselfe, and he then commended to withdraw, after a
   considerable debate, put it to the question, whether he were guilty
   of misdemeanour upon the Commissioners first observation, the words
   of which were, That all monyes received by him out of His Majesty's
   Exchequer are by the privy seales assigned for particular services,
   but no such thing observed or specified in his payments, whereby he
   hath assumed to himselfe a liberty to make use of the King's
   treasure for other uses then is directed. The House dividing upon
   the question, the ayes went out, and wondered why they were kept out
   so extraordinary a time. The ayes proved 138 and the noes 129; and
   the reason of the long stay then appeared; the tellers for the ayes
   chanced to be very ill reckoners, so that they were forced to tell
   severall times over in the House, and when at last the tellers for
   the ayes would have agreed the noes to be 142, the noes would needs
   say that they were 143, whereupon those for the ayes would tell once
   more and then found the noes to be indeed but 129; and the ayes then
   coming in proved to be 138; whereas if the noes had been content
   with the first error of the tellers, Sir George had been quit upon
   that observation. This I have told you so minutely because it is the
   second fatall and ominous accident that hath fain out in the
   divisions about Sir G. Cartaret. Thursday was ordered for the second
   observation, the words of which are, Two hundred and thirty thousand
   seven hundred thirty and one thousand pounds thirteen shillings and
   ninepence, claimed as payd, and deposited for security of interest,
   and yet no distinct specification of time appeares either on his
   receits or payments, whereby no judgment can be made how interest
   accrues; so that we cannot yet allow the same. But this day was
   diverted and wholy taken up by a speciall report orderd by the
   Committee for the Bill of Conventicles, that the House be informed
   of severall Conventicles in Westminster which might be of dangerous
   consequences. From hence arose much discourse; also of a report that
   Ludlow was in England, that Commonwealths-men flock about the town,
   and there were meetings said to be, where they talkt of New Modells
   of Government; so that the House ordered a Committee to receive
   informations both concerning Conventicles and these other dangerous
   meetings; and then entered a resolution upon their books without
   putting it to the question, That this House will adhere to His
   Majesty, and the Government of Church and State as now established,
   against all its enemyes. Friday having bin appointed, as I told you
   in my former letter, for the House to sit in a grand Committee upon
   the motion for the King's supply, was spent wholy in debate, whether
   they should do so or no, and concluded at last in a consent, that
   the sitting in a grand Committee upon the motion for the King's
   supply should be put of till Friday next, and so it was ordered. The
   reason of which kind of proceeding, lest you should thinke to arise
   from an indisposition of the House, I shall tell you as they appeare
   to me, to have been the expectation of what Bill will come from the
   Lords in stead of that of ours which they threw out, and a desire to
   redresse and see thoroughly into the miscarriages of mony before any
   more should be granted. To-day the House hath bin upon the second
   observation, and after a debate till foure a'clock, have voted him
   guilty also of misdemeanor in that particular. The Commissioners are
   ordered to attend the House again on Munday, which is done
   constantly for the illustration of any matter in their report,
   wherein the House is not cleare. And to say the truth, the House
   receives great satisfaction from them, and shows them extraordinary
   respect. These are the things of principall notice since my last."

Carteret eventually was censured and suspended and dismissed.

The sudden incursion of religion during a financial debate is highly
characteristic of the House of Commons.

Whilst Queen Elizabeth and her advisers did succeed in making some sort
of a settlement of religion having regard to the questions of her time,
the Restoration bishops, an inferior set of men, wholly failed. The
repressive legislation that followed upon the Act of Uniformity,
succeeded in establishing and endowing (with voluntary contributions)
what is sometimes called, absurdly enough, Political Dissent. On
points, not of doctrine, but of ceremony, and of church government, one
half of the religiously-minded community were by oaths and declarations,
and by employing the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper as "a picklock to a
place," drawn out of the service of the State. Excluded from Parliament
and from all corporate bodies, from grammar-schools and universities,
English Dissent learned to live its own life, remote from the army, the
navy, and the civil service, quite outside of what perhaps may be fairly
called the main currents of the national life. Nonconformists venerated
their own divines, were reared in their own academies and colleges, read
their own books, went, when the modified law permitted it, to their own
conventicles in back streets, and made it their boast that they had
never entered their parish churches, for the upkeep of which they were
compelled to subscribe--save for the purpose of being married. The
nation suffered by reason of this complete severance. Trade excepted,
there was no community of interest between Church and Dissent. Sobriety,
gravity, a decent way of life, the sense of religious obligation (even
when united with the habit of _extempore_ prayer, and a hereditary
disrespect for bishops' aprons), are national assets, as the expression
now goes, which cannot be disregarded with impunity.

The Conventicle Act Marvell refers to was a stringent measure, imposing
pecuniary fines upon any persons of sixteen years of age or upwards who
"under pretence of religion" should be present at any meeting of more
than five persons, or more than those of the household, "in other manner
than allowed by the Liturgy and practice of the Church of England."
Heavier fines were imposed upon the preachers. The poet Waller, who was
"nursed in Parliaments," having been first returned from Amersham in
1621, made a very sensible remark on the second reading: "Let them alone
and they will preach against each other; by this Bill they will
incorporate as being all under one calamity."[145:1] But by 144 to 78
the Bill was read, though it did not become law until the following
session. An indignant Member of Parliament once told Cromwell that he
would take the "sense" of the House against some proposal. "Very well,"
said Cromwell, "you shall take the 'sense' of the House, and I will take
the 'nonsense,' and we will see who tells the most votes."

In February 1670 the king opened a new session, and in March Marvell
wrote a private letter to a relative at Bordeaux, in which he "lends his
mind out," after a fashion forbidden him in his correspondence with his
constituents:--

   "DEAR COUSIN,-- ... You know that we having voted the King, before
   Christmas, four hundred thousand pounds, and no more; and enquiring
   severely into ill management, and being ready to adjourn ourselves
   till February, his Majesty, fortified by some undertakers of the
   meanest of our House, threw up all as nothing, and prorogued us from
   the first of December till the fourteenth of February. All that
   interval there was great and numerous caballing among the courtiers.
   The King also all the while examined at council the reports from the
   Commissioners of Accounts, where they were continually
   discountenanced, and treated rather as offenders than judges. In
   this posture we met, and the King, being exceedingly necessitous for
   money, spoke to us _stylo minaci et imperatorio_; and told us the
   inconveniences which would fall on the nation by want of a supply,
   should not ly at his door; that we must not revive any discord
   betwixt the Lords and us; that he himself had examined the accounts,
   and found every penny to have been employed in the war; and he
   recommended the Scotch union. The Garroway party appeared with the
   usual vigour, but the country gentlemen appeared not in their true
   number the first day: so, for want of seven voices, the first blow
   was against them. When we began to talk of the Lords, the King sent
   for us alone, and recommended a rasure of all proceedings. The same
   thing you know that we proposed at first. We presently ordered it,
   and went to tell him so the same day, and to thank him. At coming
   down, (a pretty ridiculous thing!) Sir Thomas Clifford carryed
   Speaker and Mace, and all members there, into the King's cellar, to
   drink his health. The King sent to the Lords more peremptoryly, and
   they, with much grumbling, agreed to the rasure. When the
   Commissioners of Accounts came before us, sometimes we heard them
   _pro formâ_, but all falls to dirt. The terrible Bill against
   Conventicles is sent up to the Lords; and we and the Lords, as to
   the Scotch busyness, have desired the King to name English
   Commissioners to treat, but nothing they do to be valid, but on a
   report to Parliament, and an act to confirm. We are now, as we
   think, within a week of rising. They are making mighty alterations
   in the Conventicle Bill (which, as we sent up, is the quintessence
   of arbitrary malice), and sit whole days, and yet proceed but by
   inches, and will, at the end, probably affix a Scotch clause of the
   King's power in externals. So the fate of the Bill is uncertain, but
   must probably pass, being the price of money. The King told some
   eminent citizens, who applyed to him against it, that they must
   address themselves to the Houses, that he must not disoblige his
   friends; and if it had been in the power of their friends, he had
   gone without money. There is a Bill in the Lords to encourage people
   to buy all the King's fee-farm rents; so he is resolved once more to
   have money enough in his pocket, and live on the common for the
   future. The great Bill begun in the Lords, and which makes more ado
   than ever any Act in this Parliament did, is for enabling Lord Ros,
   long since divorced in the spiritual court, and his children
   declared illegitimate by Act of Parliament, to marry again. Anglesey
   and Ashly, who study and know their interests as well as any
   gentlemen at court, and whose sons have marryed two sisters of Ros,
   inheritrixes if he has no issue, yet they also drive on the Bill
   with the greatest vigour. The King is for the Bill: the Duke of
   York, and all the Papist Lords, and all the Bishops, except Cosins,
   Reynolds, and Wilkins, are against it. They sat all Thursday last,
   without once rising, till almost ten at night, in most solemn and
   memorable debate, whether it should be read the second time, or
   thrown out. At last, at the question, there were forty-two persons
   and six proxys against it, and forty-one persons and fifteen proxys
   for it. If it had not gone for it, the Lord Arlington had a power in
   his pocket from the King to have nulled the proxys, if it had been
   to the purpose. It was read the second time yesterday, and, on a
   long debate whether it should be committed, it went for the Bill by
   twelve odds, in persons and proxys. The Duke of York, the bishops,
   and the rest of the party, have entered their protests, on the first
   day's debate, against it. Is not this fine work? This Bill must come
   down to us. It is my opinion that Lauderdale at one ear talks to the
   King of Monmouth, and Buckingham at the other of a new Queen. It is
   also my opinion that the King was never since his coming in, nay,
   all things considered, no King since the Conquest, so absolutely
   powerful at home, as he is at the present; nor any Parliament, or
   places, so certainly and constantly supplyed with men of the same
   temper. In such a conjuncture, dear Will, what probability is there
   of my doing any thing to the purpose? The King would needs take the
   Duke of Albemarle out of his son's hand to bury him at his own
   charges. It is almost three months, and he yet lys in the dark
   unburyed, and no talk of him. He left twelve thousand pounds a year,
   and near two hundred thousand pounds in money. His wife dyed some
   twenty days after him; she layed in state, and was buryed, at her
   son's expence, in Queen Elizabeth's Chapel. And now,

        "Disce, puer, virtutem ex me verumque laborem,
         Fortunam ex aliis.

   "_March 21, 1670._"

This remarkable letter lets us into many secrets.

The Conventicle Bill is "the price of money." The king's interest in
the Roos divorce case was believed to be due to his own desire to be
quit of a barren and deserted wife.[148:1] Our most religious king had
nineteen bastards, but no lawful issue. It may seem strange that so high
a churchman as Bishop Cosin should have taken the view he did, but Cosin
had a strong dash of the layman in his constitution, and was always an
advocate of divorce, with permission to re-marry, in cases of adultery.

A further and amending Bill for rebuilding the city was before the
House--one of eighty-four clauses, "the longest Bill, perhaps, that ever
past in Parliament," says Marvell; but the Roos Divorce Bill and the
Conventicle Bill proved so exciting in the House of Lords that they had
little time for anything else. Union with Scotland, much desired by the
king, but regarded with great suspicion by all Parliamentarians, fell
flat, though Commissioners were appointed.

The Conventicle Bill passed the Lords, who tagged on to it a proviso
Marvell refers to in his next letter, which the Lower House somewhat
modified by the omission of certain words. Lord Roos was allowed to
re-marry. The big London Bill got through.

Another private letter of Marvell's, of this date, is worth reading:--

   "DEAREST WILL,--I wrote to you two letters, and payd for them from
   the posthouse here at Westminster; to which I have had no answer.
   Perhaps they miscarryed. I sent on an answer to the only letter I
   received from Bourdeaux, and having put it into Mr. Nelthorp's hand,
   I doubt not but it came to your's. To proceed. The same day (March
   26th letter) my letter bore date, there was an extraordinary thing
   done. The King, about ten o'clock, took boat, with Lauderdale only,
   and two ordinary attendants, and rowed awhile as towards the bridge,
   and soon turned back to the Parliament stairs, and so went up into
   the House of Lords, and took his seat. Almost all of them were
   amazed, but all seemed so; and the Duke of York especially was very
   much surprized. Being sat, he told them it was a privilege he
   claimed from his ancestors to be present at their deliberations.
   That therefore, they should not, for his coming, interrupt their
   debates, but proceed, and be covered. They did so. It is true that
   this has been done long ago, but it is now so old, that it is new,
   and so disused, that at any other but so bewitched a time as this,
   it would have been looked on as an high usurpation, and breach of
   privilege. He indeed sat still, for the most part, and interposed
   very little; sometimes a word or two. But the most discerning
   opinion was, that he did herein as he rowed for having had his face
   first to the Conventicle Bill, he turned short to the Lord Ross's.
   So that, indeed, it is credible, the King, in prospect of diminishing
   the Duke of York's influence in the Lord's House, in this, or any
   future matter, resolved, and wisely enough at present, to weigh up
   and lighten the Duke's efficacy, by coming himself in person. After
   three or four days continuance, the Lords were very well used to the
   King's presence, and sent the Lord Steward and Lord Chamberlain, to
   him, when they might wait, as an House on him, to render their
   humble thanks for the honour he did them. The hour was appointed
   them, and they thanked him, and he took it well. So this matter, of
   such importance on all great occasions, seems riveted to them, and
   us, for the future, and to all posterity. Now the Lord Ross's Bill
   came in order to another debate, and the King present. Nevertheless
   the debate lasted an entire day; and it passed by very few voices.
   The King has ever since continued his session among them, and says
   it is better than going to a play. In this session the Lords sent
   down to us a proviso[149:1] for the King, that would have restored
   him to all civil or ecclesiastical prerogatives which his ancestors
   had enjoyed at any time since the Conquest. There was never so
   compendious a piece of absolute universal tyranny. But the Commons
   made them ashamed of it, and retrenched it. The Parliament was never
   embarrassed, beyond recovery. We are all venal cowards, except some
   few. What plots of State will go on this interval I know not. There
   is a new set of justices of peace framing through the whole kingdom.
   The governing cabal, since Ross's busyness, are Buckingham,
   Lauderdale, Ashly, Orrery, and Trevor. Not but the other cabal too
   have seemingly sometimes their turn. Madam,[150:1] our King's
   sister, during the King of France's progress in Flanders, is to come
   as far as Canterbury. There will doubtless be family counsels then.
   Some talk of a French Queen to be then invented for our King. Some
   talk of a sister of Denmark; others of a good virtuous Protestant
   here at home. The King disavows it; yet he has sayed in publick, he
   knew not why a woman may not be divorced for barrenness, as a man
   for impotency. The Lord Barclay went on Monday last for Ireland, the
   King to Newmarket. God keep, and increase you, in all
   things.--Yours, etc.

   "_April 14, 1670._"


FOOTNOTES:

[77:1] Clarendon's _Life_, vol. ii. p. 442.

[79:1] The clerks, however, only _counted_ the members who voted, and
kept no record of their _names_. Mr. Gladstone remembered the alteration
being made in 1836, and how unpopular it was. The change was a greater
revolution than the Reform Bill. See _The Unreformed House of Commons_
by Edward Posselt, vol. i. p. 587.

[79:2]

    "And a Parliament had lately met
    Without a single Bankes."--_Praed_.

[82:1] See Dr. Halley's _Lancashire--its Puritanism and Nonconformity_,
vol. ii. pp. 1-140, a most informing book.

[88:1] Clarendon's _History_, vol. vi. p. 249.

[90:1] An Historical Poem.--Grosart, vol. i. p. 343.

[92:1] Macaulay's _History_, vol. i. p. 154.

[95:1] I am acquainted with the romantic story which would have us
believe that Lady Fauconberg, foretelling the time to come, had caused
some other body than her father's to be buried in the Abbey (see _Notes
and Queries_, 5th October 1878, and Waylen's _House of Cromwell_, p.
341).

[96:1] See _The Unreformed House of Commons_, by Edward Porritt, vol. i.
p. 51. Marvell's old enemy, Parker, Bishop of Oxford, in his _History of
his own Time_, composed after Marvell's death, reviles his dead
antagonist for having taken this payment which, the bishop says, was
made by a custom which "had a long time been antiquated and out of
date." "Gentlemen," says the bishop, "despised so vile a stipend," yet
Marvell required it "for the sake of a bare subsistence, although in
this mean poverty he was nevertheless haughty and insolent." In Parker's
opinion poor men should be humble.

[98:1] _Parliamentary History_, vol. iv., App. No. III.

[104:1] Mr. Gladstone's testimony is that no real improvement was
effected until within the period of his own memory. 'Our services were
probably without a parallel in the world for their debasement.' (See
_Gleanings_, vi. p. 119.)

[106:1] There is a copy in the library of the _Athenæum_, London: "A
Relation of Three Embassies from his sacred Majestie Charles II. to the
Great Duke of Muscovie, the King of Sweden, and the King of Denmark.
Performed by the Right Ho^ble the Earle of Carlisle in the Years 1663
and 1664. Written by an Attendant on the Embassies, and published with
his Lordship's approbation. London. Printed for John Starkie at the
Miter in Fleet Street, near Temple Barr, 1669."

[109:1] "I have mentioned the dignity of his manners.... He was at his
very best on occasion of Durbars, investitures, and the like.... It
irritated him to see men giggling or jeering instead of acting their
parts properly."--_Life of Lord Dufferin_, vol. ii. p. 317.

[116:1] _Hist. MSS. Com., Portland Papers_, vol. iii. p. 296.

[116:2] See above, vol. iii. p. 294.

[118:1] Sir Walter Besant doubted this. See his _London_.

[123:1] Mr. Goldwin Smith says this was the first pitched battle between
Protection and Free Trade in England.--_The United Kingdom_, vol. ii. p.
25.

[126:1] Being curious to discover whether no "property" man raised his
voice against these measures, I turned to that true "home of lost
causes," the Protests of the House of Lords; and there, sure enough, I
found one solitary peer, Henry Carey, Earl of Dover, entering his
dissent to both Bills--to the Judicature Bill because of the unlimited
power given to the judges, to the Rebuilding Bill because of the
exorbitant powers entrusted to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen to give away
or dispose of the property of landlords.

[128:1] Clarendon's _Life_, vol. iii. p. 796.

[129:1] Clarendon's _Life_, vol. iii. p. 798.

[129:2] "Instructions to a Painter for the drawing of the Posture and
Progress of His Majesty's forces at Sea under the command of His
Highness Royal: together with the Battel and Victory obtained over the
Dutch, June 3, 1665."--Waller's _Works_, 1730, p. 161.

[130:1] Sir John Denham's wife was reported to have been poisoned by a
dish of chocolate, at the bidding of the Duchess of York.

[131:1] Clarendon's eldest son.

[139:1] It is disconcerting to find Evelyn recording this, his last
visit to Clarendon, in his Diary under date of the 9th December, by
which time the late Chancellor was in Rouen. One likes notes in a diary
to be made contemporaneously and not "written-up" afterwards. Evelyn
makes the same kind of mistake about Cromwell's funeral, misdating it a
month.

[140:1] The duke died in 1670 and had a magnificent funeral on the 30th
of April. See _Hist. MSS. Com., Duke of Portland's Papers_, vol. iii. p.
314. His laundress-Duchess did not long survive him.

[141:1] Afterwards Lord Dartmouth, a great friend of James the Second,
but one who played a dubious part at the Revolution.

[145:1] The poet Waller was one of the wittiest speakers the House of
Commons has ever known.

[148:1] For a full account of this remarkable case, see Clarendon's
_Life_, iii. 733-9.

[149:1] "Provided, etc., that neither this Act nor anything therein
contained shall extend to invalidate or avoid his Majesty's supremacy in
ecclesiastical affairs [or to destroy any of his Majesty's rights powers
or prerogatives belonging to the Imperial Crown of this realm or at any
time exercised by himself or any of his predecessors Kings or Queens of
England] but that his Majesty his heirs and successors may from time to
time and at all times hereafter exercise and enjoy all such powers and
authorities aforesaid as fully and amply as himself or any of his
predecessors have or might have done the same anything in this Act (or
any other law statute or usage to the contrary) notwithstanding." The
words in brackets were rejected by the Commons. See _Parliamentary
History_, iv. 446-7.

[150:1] Madame's business is now well known. The secret Treaty of Dover
was the result of this visit.




CHAPTER V

"THE REHEARSAL TRANSPROSED"


It is never easy for ecclesiastical controversy to force its way into
literature. The importance of the theme will be questioned by few. The
ability displayed in its illumination can be denied by none. It is the
temper that usually spoils all. A collection in any way approaching
completeness, of the pamphlets this contention has produced in England,
would contain tens of thousands of volumes; full of curious learning and
anecdotes, of wide reading and conjecture, of shrewdness and wit; yet
these books are certainly the last we would seek to save from fire or
water. Could they be piled into scales of moral measurement a single
copy of the _Imitatio_, of the _Holy Dying_, of the _Saint's Rest_,
would outweigh them all. Man may not be a religious animal, but he
recognises and venerates the spirit of religion whenever he perceives
it, and it is a spirit which is apt to evaporate amidst the strife of
rival wits. Who can doubt the sincerity of Milton, when he exclaimed
with the sad prophet Jeremy, "Woe is me my Mother that thou hast borne
me a man of strife and contention."

Marvell's chief prose work, the two parts of _The Rehearsal
Transprosed_, is a very long pamphlet indeed, composed by way of reply
to certain publications of Samuel Parker, afterwards Bishop of Oxford.
Controversially Marvell's book was a great success.[152:1] It amused the
king, delighted the wits, was welcomed, if not read, by the pious folk
whose side it espoused, whilst its literary excellence was sufficient to
win, in after years, the critical approval of Swift, whose style, though
emphatically his own, bears traces of its master having given, I will
not say his days and nights, but certainly some profitable hours, to the
study of Marvell's prose.

Biographers of controversialists seldom do justice to the other side.
Possibly they do not read it, and Parker has been severely handled by my
predecessors. He was not an honour to his profession, being, perhaps, as
good or as bad a representative of the seamy side of State Churchism as
there is to be found. He was the son of a Puritan father, and whilst at
Wadham lived by rule, fasting and praying. He took his degree in the
early part of 1659, and migrating to Trinity came under the influence of
Dr. Bathurst, then Senior Fellow, to whom, so he says in one of his
dedications, "I owe my first rescue from the chains and fetters of an
unhappy education."[152:2] Anything Parker did he did completely, and
we next hear of him in London in 1665, a nobleman's chaplain, setting
the table in a roar by making fun of his former friends, "a mimical way
of drolling upon the puritans." "He followed the town-life, haunted the
best companies and, to polish himself from any pedantic roughness, he
read and saw the plays with much care and more preparing than most of
the auditory." In 1667 the Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr. Sheldon, a very
mundane person indeed, made Parker his chaplain, and three years later
Archdeacon of Canterbury. He reached many preferments, so that, says
Marvell, "his head swell'd like any bladder with wind and vapour." He
had an active pen and a considerable range of subject. In 1670 he
produced "A Discourse of Ecclesiastical Politie wherein the Authority of
the Civil Magistrate over the Consciences of Subjects in Matters of
External Religion is Asserted; The Mischiefs and Inconveniences of
Toleration are represented and all Pretenses pleaded in behalf of
_Liberty of Conscience_ are fully answered." Some one instantly took up
the cudgels in a pamphlet entitled _Insolence and Impudence Triumphant_,
and the famous Dr. Owen also protested in _Truth and Innocence
Vindicated_. Parker replied to Owen in _A Defence and Continuation of
Ecclesiastical Politie_, and in the following year, 1672, reprinted a
treatise of Bishop Bramholl's with a preface "shewing what grounds there
are of Fears and Jealousies of Popery."

This was the state of the controversy when Marvell entered upon it with
his _Rehearsal Transprosed_, a fantastic title he borrowed for no very
good reasons from the farce of the hour, and a very good farce too, the
Duke of Buckingham's _Rehearsal_, which was performed for the first time
at the Theatre Royal on the 7th of November 1671, and printed early in
1672. Most of us have read Sheridan's _Critic_ before we read
Buckingham's _Rehearsal_, which is not the way to do justice to the
earlier piece. It is a matter of literary tradition that the duke had
much help in the composition of a farce it took ten years to make.
Butler, Sprat, and Clifford, the Master of Charterhouse, are said to be
co-authors. However this may be, the piece was a great success, and both
Marvell and Parker, I have no doubt, greatly enjoyed it, but I cannot
think the former was wise to stuff his plea for Liberty of Conscience so
full as he did with the details of a farce. His doing so should, at all
events, acquit him of the charge of being a sour Puritan. In the
_Rehearsal_ Bayes (Dryden), who is turned by Sheridan in his adaptation
of the piece into Mr. Puff, is made to produce out of his pocket his
book of _Drama Commonplaces_, and the play proceeds (_Johnson_ and
_Smith_ being _Sheridan's_ Dangle and Sneer):

   "_Johnson._ _Drama Commonplaces_! pray what's that?

   _Bayes._ Why, Sir, some certain helps, that we men of Art have found
      it convenient to make use of.

   _Johnson._ How, Sir, help for Wit?

   _Bayes._ I, Sir, that's my position. And I do here averr, that no man
      yet the Sun e'er shone upon, has parts sufficient to furnish out a
      Stage, except it be with the help of these my rules.

   _Johnson._ What are those Rules, I pray?

   _Bayes._ Why, Sir, my first Rule is the Rule of Transversion, or
      _Regula Duplex_, changing Verse into Prose, or Prose into Verse,
      _alternative_ as you please.

   _Smith._ How's that, Sir, by a Rule, I pray?

   _Bayes._ Why, thus, Sir; nothing more easy when understood: I take a
      Book in my hand, either at home, or elsewhere, for that's all one,
      if there be any Wit in 't, as there is no Book but has some, I
      Transverse it; that is, if it be Prose, put it into Verse (but
      that takes up some time), if it be Verse, put it into Prose.

   _Johnson._ Methinks, Mr. _Bayes_, that putting Verse into Prose
      should be called Transprosing.

   _Bayes_. By my troth, a very good Notion, and hereafter it shall be
      so."

Marvell must be taken to have meant by his title that he saw some
resemblance between Parker and Bayes, and, indeed, he says he does, and
gives that as one of his excuses for calling Parker Bayes all through:--

   "But before I commit myself to the dangerous depths of his Discourse
   which I am now upon the brink of, I would with his leave, make a
   motion; that instead of Author I may henceforth indifferently well
   call him Mr. Bayes as oft as I shall see occasion. And that first
   because he has no name, or at least will not own it, though he
   himself writes under the greatest security, and gives us the first
   letters of other men's names before he be asked them. Secondly,
   because he is, I perceive, a lover of elegancy of style and can
   endure no man's tautologies but his own; and therefore I would not
   distaste him with too frequent repetition of one word. But chiefly
   because Mr. Bayes and he do very much symbolise, in their
   understandings, in their expressions, in their humour, in their
   contempt and quarrelling of all others, though of their own
   profession."

But justice must be done even to Parker before handing him over to the
Tormentor. What were his positions? He was a coarse-fibred, essentially
irreligious fellow, the accredited author of the reply to the question
"What is the best body of Divinity?" "That which would help a man to
keep a Coach and six horses," but he is a lucid and vigorous writer,
knowing very well that he had to steer his ship through a narrow and
dangerous channel, avoiding Hobbism on the one side and tender
consciences on the other. Each generation of State Churchmen has the
same task. The channel remains to-day just as it ever did, with Scylla
and Charybdis presiding over their rocks as of old. Hobbes's _Leviathan_
appeared in 1651, and in 1670 both his philosophy and his statecraft
were fashionable doctrine. All really pious people called Hobbes an
Atheist. Technically he was nothing of the sort, but it matters little
what he was technically, since no plain man who can read can doubt that
Hobbes's enthronement of the State was the dethronement of God:--

   "Seeing then that in every Christian commonwealth the civil sovereign
   is the supreme factor to whose charge the whole flock of his subjects
   is commuted, and consequently that it is by his authority that all
   other pastors are made and have power to teach and perform all other
   pastoral offices, it followeth also that it is from the civil
   sovereign that all other pastors derive their right of teaching,
   preaching and other functions pertaining to that office, and that
   they are but his ministers in the same way as the magistrates of
   towns, judges in Court of Justice and commanders of assizes are all
   but ministers of him that is the magistrate of the whole
   commonwealth, judge of all causes and commander of the whole militia,
   which is always the Civil Sovereign. And the reason hereof is not
   because they that teach, but because they that are to learn, are his
   subjects."--(_The Leviathan_, Hobbes's _English Works_ (Molesworth's
   Edition), vol. iii. p. 539.)

Hobbes shirks nothing, and asks himself the question, What if a king, or
a senate or other sovereign person forbid us to believe in Christ? The
answer given is, "such forbidding is of no effect; because belief and
unbelief never follow men's commands." But suppose "we be commanded by
our lawful prince to say with our tongue we believe not, must we obey
such command?" Here Hobbes a little hesitates to say outright "Yes, you
must"; but he does say "whatsoever a subject is compelled to do in
obedience to his own Sovereign, and doth it not in order to his own
mind, but in order to the laws of his country, that action is not his,
but his Sovereign's--nor is it that he in this case denieth Christ
before men, but his Governor and the law of his country." Hobbes then
puts the case of a Mahomedan subject of a Christian Commonwealth who is
required under pain of death to be present at the Divine Service of the
Christian Church--what is he to do? If, says Hobbes, you say he ought
to die, then you authorise all private men to disobey their princes in
maintenance of their religion, true or false, and if you say the
Mahomedan ought to obey, you admit Hobbes's proposition and ought to
consent to be yourself bound by it. (See Hobbes's _English Works_, iii.
493.)

The Church of England, though anxious both to support the king and
suppress the Dissenters, could not stomach Hobbes; but if it could not,
how was it to deal with Hobbes's question, "if it is _ever_ right to
disobey your lawful prince, who is to determine _when_ it is right?"

Parker seeks to grapple with this difficulty. He disowns Hobbes.

   "When men have once swallowed this principle, that Mankind is free
   from all obligations antecedent to the laws of the Commonwealth, and
   that the Will of the Sovereign Power is the only measure of Good and
   Evil, they proceed suitably to its consequences to believe that no
   Religion can obtain the force of law till it is established as such
   by supreme authority, that the Holy Scriptures were not laws to any
   man till they were enjoyn'd by the Christian Magistrate, and that if
   the Sovereign Power would declare the Alcoran to be Canonical
   Scripture, it would be as much the Word of God as the Four Gospels.
   (See _Hobbes_, vol. iii. p. 366.) So that all Religions are in
   reality nothing but Cheats and impostures to awe the common people to
   obedience. And therefore although Princes may wisely make use of the
   foibles of Religion to serve their own turns upon the silly
   multitude, yet 'tis below their wisdom to be seriously concerned
   themselves for such fooleries." (Parker's _Ecc. Politie_, p. 137.)

As against this fashionable Hobbism, Parker pleads Conscience.

   "When anything that is apparently and intrinsically evil is the
   Matter of a Human Law, whether it be of a Civil or Ecclesiastical
   concern, here God is to be obeyed rather than Man."

He forcibly adds:--

   "Those who would take off from the Consciences of Men all obligations
   antecedent to those of Human Laws, instead of making the power of
   Princes Supreme, Absolute and Uncontrollable, they utterly enervate
   all their authority, and set their subjects at perfect liberty from
   all their commands. For if we once remove all the antecedent
   obligations of Conscience and Religion, Men will no further be bound
   to submit to their laws than only as themselves shall see convenient,
   and if they are under no other restraint it will be their wisdom to
   rebel as oft as it is their interest." (_Ecc. Politie_, pp. 112-113.)

But though when dealing with Hobbes, Parker thinks fit to assert the
claims of conscience so strongly, when he has to grapple with those who,
like the immortal author of _The Pilgrim's Progress_, "devilishly and
perniciously abstained from coming to Church," and upheld "unlawful
Meetings and Conventicles," his tone alters, and it is hard to
distinguish his position from that of the philosopher of Malmesbury.

Parker's argument briefly stated, and as much as possible in his own
vigorous language, comes to this:

There is and always must be a competition between the prerogative of
the Prince or State and that of Conscience, which on this occasion is
defined as "every private man's own judgment and persuasion of things."
"Do subjects rebel against their Sovereign? 'Tis Conscience that takes
up arms. Do they murder Kings? 'Tis under the conduct of Conscience. Do
they separate from the communion of the Church? 'Tis Conscience that is
the Schismatick. Everything that a man has a mind to is his Conscience."
(_Ecc. Politie_, p. 6.)

How is this competition to be resolved? Parker answers in exact language
which would have met with John Austin's warm approval.

   "The Supreme Government of every Commonwealth, wherever it is lodged,
   must of necessity be universal, absolute and uncontrollable. For if
   it be limited, it may be controlled, but 'tis a thick and palpable
   contradiction to call such a power supreme in that whatever controls
   it must as to that case be its Superior. And therefore affairs of
   Religion being so strongly influential upon affairs of State, they
   must be as uncontrollably subject to the Supreme Power as all other
   Civil concerns." (_Ecc. Politie_, p. 27.)

If the magistrate may make penal laws against swearing and blasphemy,
why not as to rites and ceremonies of public worship? (39.) Devotion
towards God is a virtue akin to gratitude to man; religion is a branch
of morality. The Puritans' talk about grace is a mere imposture, (76)
which extracts from Parker vehement language. What is there to make such
a fuss about? he cries. Why cannot you come to Church? You are left free
to _think_ what you like. Your secret thoughts are your own, but living
as you do in society, and knowing as you must how, unless the law
interferes, "every opinion must make a sect, and every sect a faction,
and every faction when it is able, a war, and every war is the cause of
God, and the cause of God can never be prosecuted with too much
violence" (16), why cannot you conform to a form of worship which,
though it does not profess to be prescribed in all particulars, contains
nothing actually forbidden in the Scriptures? What authority have
Dissenters for singing psalms in metre? "Where has our Saviour or his
Apostles enjoined a directory for public worship? What Scripture command
is there for the _three_ significant ceremonies of the Solemn League and
Covenant, viz. that the whole congregation should take it (1) uncovered,
(2) standing, (3) with their right hand lift up bare" (184), and so on.

In answer to the objection that the civil magistrate might establish a
worship in its own nature sinful and sensual, Parker replies it is not
in the least likely, and the risk must be run. "Our enquiry is to find
out the best way of settling the world that the state of things admit
of--if indeed mankind were infallible, this controversy were at an end,
but seeing that all men are liable to errors and mistakes, and seeing
that there is an absolute necessity of a supreme power in all public
affairs, our question (I say) is, What is the most prudent and expedient
way of settling them, not that possibly might be, but that really is.
And this (as I have already sufficiently proved) is to devolve their
management on the supreme civil power which, though it may be imperfect
and liable to errors and mistakes, yet 'tis the least so, and is a much
better way to attain public peace and tranquillity than if they were
left to the ignorance and folly of every private man" (212).

I now feel that at least I have done Parker full justice, but as so far
I have hardly given an example of his familiar style, I must find room
for two or three final quotations. The thing Parker hated most in the
world was a _Tender Conscience_. He protests against the weakness which
is content with passing penal laws, but does not see them carried out
for fear of wounding these trumpery tender consciences. "Most men's
minds or consciences are weak, silly and ignorant things, acted by fond
and absurd principles and imposed upon by their vices and their
passions." (7.) "However, if the obligation of laws must yield to that
of a tender conscience, how impregnably is every man that has a mind to
disobey armed against all the commands of his superiors. No authority
shall be able to govern him farther than he himself pleases, and if he
dislike the law he is sufficiently excused (268). A weak conscience is
the product of a weak understanding, and he is a very subtil man that
can find the difference between a tender head and a tender conscience
(269). It is a glorious thing to suffer for a tender conscience, and
therefore it is easy and natural for some people to affect some little
scruples against the commands of authority, thereby to make themselves
obnoxious to some little penalties, and then what godly men are they
that are so ready to be punished for a good conscience" (278). "The
voice of the publick law cannot but drown the uncertain whispers of a
tender conscience; all its scruples are hushed and silenced by the
commands of authority. It dares not whimper when that forbids, and the
nod of a prince awes it into silence and submission. But if they dare to
murmur, and their proud stomachs will swell against the rebukes of their
superiors, then there is no remedy but the rod and correction. They must
be chastised out of their peevishness and lashed into obedience (305).
The doctor concludes his treatise with the words always dear to men of
fluctuating opinions, 'What I have written, I have written'" (326).

Whilst Parker was writing this book in his snug quarters in the
Archbishop's palace at Lambeth, Bunyan was in prison in Bedford for
refusing to take the communion on his knees in his parish church; and
Dr. Manton, who had been offered the Deanery of Rochester, was in the
Gate House Prison under the Five Mile Act.

The first part of _The Rehearsal Transprosed_, though its sub-title is
"Animadversions upon a late book intituled a Preface shewing what
grounds there are of Fears and Jealousies of Popery," deals after
Marvell's own fashion with all three of Parker's books, the
_Ecclesiastical Politie_, the _Bramhall Preface_, and the _Defence of
the Ecclesiastical Politie_. It is by no means so easy to give a fair
notion of the _Rehearsal Transprosed_ in a short compass, as it was of
Parker's line of argument. The parson wrote more closely than the Member
of Parliament. I cannot give a better description of Marvell's method
than in Parker's own words in his preface to his _Reproof to the
Rehearsal Transprosed_, which appeared in 1673 and gave rise to
Marvell's second part:--

   "When," writes Parker, "I first condemned myself to the drudgery of
   this Reply, I intended nothing but a serious prosecution of my
   Argument, and to let the World see that it is not reading Histories
   or Plays or Gazettes, nor going on pilgrimage to Geneva, nor learning
   French and Italian, nor passing the Alps, nor being a cunning
   Gamester that can qualify a man to discourse of Conscience and
   Ecclesiastical Policy; in that it is not capping our Argument with a
   story that will answer it, nor clapping an apothegm upon an assertion
   that will prove it, nor stringing up Proverbs and Similitudes upon
   one another that will make up a Coherent Discourse."

Allowing for bias this is no unfair account of Marvell's method, and it
was just because this was Marvell's method that he succeeded so well in
amusing the king and in pleasing the town, and that he may still be read
by those who love reading with a fair measure of interest and enjoyment.

Witty and humorous men are always at a disadvantage except on the stage.
The hum-drum is the style for Englishmen. Bishop Burnet calls Marvell "a
droll," Parker, who was to be a bishop, calls him "a buffoon." Marvell
is occasionally humorous and not infrequently carries a jest beyond the
limits of becoming mirth; but he is more often grave. Yet when he is,
his gravity was treated either as one of his feebler jokes or as an
impertinence. But as it is his wit alone that has kept him alive he need
not be pitied overmuch.

The substance of Marvell's reply to Parker, apart altogether from its
by-play, is to be found in passages like the following:--

   "Here it is that after so great an excess of wit, he thinks fit to
   take a julep and re-settle his brain and the government. He grows as
   serious as 'tis possible for a madman, and pretends to sum-up the
   whole state of the controversy with the Nonconformists. And to be
   sure he will make the story as plausible for himself as he may; but
   therefore it was that I have before so particularly quoted and bound
   him up with his own words as fast as such a Proteus could be
   pinion'd. For he is as waxen as the first matter, and no form comes
   amiss to him. Every change of posture does either alter his opinion
   or vary the expression by which we should judge of it; and sitting he
   is of one mind, and standing of another. Therefore I take myself the
   less concern'd to fight with a windmill like Quixote; or to whip a
   gig as boyes do; or with the lacqueys at Charing-Cross or
   Lincoln's-Inn-Fields to play at the Wheel of Fortune; lest I should
   fall into the hands of my Lord Chief-Justice, or Sir Edmond Godfrey.
   The truth is, in short, and let Bayes make more or less of it if he
   can, Bayes had at first built-up such a stupendous magistrate as
   never was of God's making. He had put all princes upon the rack to
   stretch them to his dimension. And as a straight line continued grows
   a circle, he had given them so infinite a power, that it was extended
   unto impotency. For though he found it not till it was too late in
   the cause, yet he felt it all along (which is the understanding of
   brutes) in the effect. For hence it is that he so often complains
   that princes know not aright that supremacy over consciences, to
   which they were so lately, since their deserting the Church of Rome,
   restored; that in most Nations government was not rightly understood,
   and many expressions of that nature: whereas indeed the matter is,
   that princes have always found that uncontroulable government over
   _conscience_ to be both unsafe and impracticable. He had run himself
   here to a stand, and perceived that there was a God, there was
   Scripture; the magistrate himself had a conscience, and must 'take
   care that he did not enjoyn things apparently evil.' But after all,
   he finds himself again at the same stand here, and is run up to the
   wall by an angel. God, and Scripture, and conscience will not let him
   go further; but he owns, that if the magistrate enjoyns things
   apparently evil, the subject may have liberty to remonstrate. What
   shall he do, then? for it is too glorious an enterprize to be
   abandoned at the first rebuffe. Why, he gives us a new translation of
   the Bible, and a new commentary! He saith, that tenderness of
   conscience might be allowed in a Church to be constituted, not in a
   Church constituted already. That tenderness of conscience and scandal
   are ignorance, pride, and obstinacy. He saith, the Nonconformists
   should communicate with him till they have clear evidence that it is
   evil. This is a civil way indeed of gaining the question, to perswade
   men that are unsatisfied, to be satisfied till they be dissatisfied.
   He threatens, he rails, he jeers them, if it were possible, out of
   all their consciences and honesty; and finding that will not do, he
   calls out the magistrate, tells him these men are not fit to live;
   there can be no security of government while they are in being. Bring
   out the pillories, whipping-posts, gallies (=galleys), rods, and
   axes (which are _ratio ultima cleri_, a clergyman's last argument, ay
   and his first too), and pull in pieces all the Trading Corporations,
   those nests of Faction and Sedition. This is a faithful account of
   the sum and intention of all his undertaking, for which, I confess,
   he was as pick'd a man as could have been employed or found out in a
   whole kingdome; but it is so much too hard a task for any man to
   atchieve, that no goose but would grow giddy with it."[165:1]

In reply to what Parker had written about the unreasonable fuss made by
the Dissenters over the "two or three symbolical ceremonies" called
sacraments, Marvell says:--

   "They (the Nonconformists) complain that these things should be
   imposed on them with so high a penalty as want nothing of a
   sacramental nature but divine institution. And because a human
   institution is herein made of equal force to a divine institution
   therefore it is that they are aggrieved.... For without the sign of
   the Cross our Church will not receive any one in Baptism; as also
   without kneeling no man is suffered to come to the Communion.... But
   here, I say, then is their (the Nonconformists') main exception that
   things indifferent and that have no proper signature or significancy
   to that purpose should by command be made conditions of
   Church-communion. I have many times wished for peaceableness' sake
   that they had a greater latitude, but if, unless they should stretch
   their consciences till they tear again, they cannot conform, what
   remedy? For I must confess that Christians have a better right and
   title to the Church and to the ordinances of God there, than the
   Author hath to his surplice.... Bishop Bramhall saith, 'I do profess
   to all the world that the transforming of indifferent opinions into
   necessary articles of faith hath been that _insana laurus_ or cursed
   bay tree, the cause of all our brawling and contention.' That which
   he saw in matter of doctrine, he would not discern in discipline....
   It is true and very piously done that our Church doth declare that
   the kneeling at the Lord's Supper is not enjoined for adoration of
   those elements and concerning the other ceremonies as before. But
   the Romanists (from whom we have them and who said of old we would
   come to feed on their meat as well as eat of their porridge) do offer
   us here many a fair declaration and distinction in very weighty
   matters to which nevertheless the conscience of our Church hath not
   complyed. But in this particular matter of kneeling which came in
   first with the doctrine of transubstantiation, the Romish Church do
   reproach us with flat idolatry, in that we, not believing the real
   presence in the bread and wine, yet do pay to something or other the
   same adoration. Suppose the ancient pagans had declared to the
   primitive Christians that the offerings of some grains of incense was
   only to perfume the room--do you think the Christians would have
   palliated so far and colluded with their consciences? Therefore
   although the Church do consider herself so much as not to alter her
   mode unto the fashion of others, yet I cannot see why she ought to
   exclude those from communion whose weaker consciences cannot, for
   fear of scandal, step further."[166:1]

With Parker's thunders and threats of the authority of princes and
states, Marvell deals more in the mood of a statesman than of a
philosopher, more as a man of affairs than as a jurist. He deplores the
ferocity of Parker's tone and that of a certain number of the clergy.

   "Why is it," he asks, "that this kind of clergy should always be and
   have been for the most precipitate, brutish, and sanguinary counsels?
   The former Civil War cannot make them wise, nor his Majesty's happy
   return good-natured, but they are still for running things up unto
   the same extremes. The softness of the Universities where they have
   been bred, the gentleness of Christianity, in which they have been
   nurtured, hath but exasperated their nature, and they seem to have
   contracted no idea of wisdom but what they learnt at school--the
   pedantry of Whipping. For whether it be or no that the clergy are not
   so well fitted by education as others for political affairs I know
   not, though I should rather think they have advantage above others,
   and even if they would but keep to their Bibles, might make the best
   Ministers of State in the world; yet it is generally observed that
   things miscarry under their government. If there be any council more
   precipitate, more violent, more extreme than other, it is theirs.
   Truly, I think the reason that God does not bless them in affairs of
   State is because he never intended them for that employment."[167:1]

Of Archbishop Laud and Charles the First, Marvell says:--

   "I am confident the Bishop studied to do both God and his Majesty
   good service; but alas, how utterly was he mistaken. Though so
   learned, so pious, so wise a man, he seem'd to know nothing beyond
   Ceremonies, Armenianism, and Mainwaring. With that he begun, with
   that ended, and thereby deform'd the whole reign of the best prince
   that ever wielded the English sceptre. For his late Majesty, being a
   prince truly pious and religious, was therefore the more inclined to
   esteem and favour the clergy. And thence, though himself of a most
   exquisite understanding, yet he could not trust it better than in
   their treatment. Whereas every man is best at his own post, and so
   the preacher in the pulpit."[167:2]

Kings, Marvell points out to Parker, must take wider views than parsons.

   "'Tis not with them as with you. You have but one cure of souls, or
   perhaps two as being a nobleman's chaplain, to look after, and if you
   made conscience of discharging them as you ought, you would find you
   had work sufficient without writing your 'Ecclesiastical Policies.'
   But they are the incumbents of whole kingdoms, and the rectorship of
   the common people, the nobility, and even of the clergy. The care I
   say of all this rests on them, so that they are fain to condescend to
   many things for peace sake and the quiet of mankind that your proud
   heart would break before it would bend to. They do not think fit to
   require any thing that is impossible, unnecessary or wanton of their
   people, but are fain to consider the very temper of the climate in
   which they live, the constitution and laws under which they have been
   formerly bred, and upon all occasions to give them good words and
   humour them like children. They reflect upon the histories of former
   times and the present transactions to regulate themselves by in every
   circumstance.... They (Kings) do not think fit to command things
   unnecessary."[168:1]

These extracts, however fatal to Marvell's traditional reputation in the
eighteenth century as a Puritan and a Republican, call for no apology.

An example of Marvell's Interludes ought to be given. There are many to
choose from.

   "There was a worthy divine, not many years dead, who in his younger
   time, being of a facetious and unlucky humour, was commonly known by
   the name of Tom Triplet; he was brought up at Paul's school under a
   severe master, Dr. Gill, and from thence he went to the University.
   There he took liberty (as 'tis usual with those that are emancipated
   from School) to tel tales and make the discipline ridiculous under
   which he was bred. But not suspecting the doctor's intelligence,
   coming once to town he went in full school to give him a visite and
   expected no less than to get a play day for his former acquaintances.
   But instead of that he found himself hors'd up in a trice, though he
   appeal'd in vain to the priviledges of the University, pleaded
   _adultus_ and invoked the mercy of the spectators. Nor was he let
   down till the master had planted a grove of birch in his back-side
   for the terrour and publick example of all waggs that divulge the
   secrets of Priscian and make merry with their teachers. This stuck so
   with Triplet that all his life-time he never forgave the doctor, but
   sent him every New Year's tide an anniversary ballad to a new tune,
   and so in his turn avenged himself of his jerking pedagogue."[168:2]

Marvell's game of picquet with a parson plays such a part in Parker's
_Reproof_ to the _Rehearsal Transprosed_ that it deserves to be
mentioned:--

   "'Tis not very many years ago that I used to play at picket; there
   was a gentleman of your robe, a dignitory of Lincoln, very well
   known and remembered in the ordinaries, but being not long since
   dead, I will save his name. Now I used to play pieces, and this
   gentleman would always go half-a-crown with me; and so all the while
   he sate on my hand he very honestly '_gave the sign_' so that I was
   always sure to lose. I afterwards discovered it, but of all the money
   that ever I was cheated of in my life, none ever vexed me so as what
   I lost by his occasion."[169:1]

There is no need to pursue the controversy further. It is still
unsettled.

Parker's _Reproof_, published in 1673, is less argumentative and
naturally enough more personal than the _Ecclesiastical Politie_. Any
use I now make of it will be purely biographical. Let us see Andrew
Marvell depicted by an angry parson--not in passages of mere abuse, as
_e.g._ "Thou dastard Craven, thou Swad, thou Mushroom, thou coward in
heart, word and deed, thou Judas, thou Crocodile"; for epithets such as
these are of no use to a biographer--but in places where Marvell is at
least made to sit for the portrait, however ill-natured.

   "And if I would study revenge I could easily have requited you with
   the Novels of a certain Jack Gentleman, that was born of pure parents
   and bred among cabin-boys, and sent from school to the University and
   from the University to the Gaming Ordinaries, but the young man,
   being easily rooked by the old Gamesters, he was sent abroad to gain
   courage and experience, and beyond sea saw the Bears of Berne and the
   large race of Capons at Geneva, and a great many fine sights beside,
   and so returned home as accomplished as he went out, tries his
   fortune once more at the Ordinaries, plays too high for a gentleman
   of his private condition, and so is at length cheated of all at
   Picquet." ... "And now to conclude; is it not a sad thing that a
   well-bred and fashionable gentleman that has frequented Ordinaries,
   that has worn Perukes and Muffs and Pantaloons and was once Master of
   a Watch, that has travelled abroad and seen as many men and
   countries as the famous Vertuosi, Sorbier and Coriat, that has heard
   the City Lions roar, that has past the Alps and seen all the
   Tredescin rarities and old stones of Italy, that has sat in the
   Porphyric Chair at Rome, that can describe the methods of the
   Elections of Popes and tell stories of the tricks of Cardinals, that
   has been employed in Embassies abroad and acquainted with Intrigues
   of State at home, that has read Plays and Histories and Gazettes;
   that I say a Gentleman thus accomplished and embellished within and
   without and all over, should ever live to that unhappy dotage as at
   last to dishonour his grey hairs and his venerable age with such
   childish and impotent endeavours at wit and buffoonery."--(_Reproof_,
   pp. 270, 274-5.)[170:1]

Marvell was very little over fifty years of his age at this time, nor is
Parker's portrait to be regarded as truthful in any other
particular--yet something of a man's character may be discovered by
noticing the way he is abused by those who want to abuse him.

Marvell, though no orator, or even debater, was the stuff of which
controversialists are made. In a letter, printed in the Duke of
Portland's papers, and dated May 3, 1673, he writes:--

   "Dr. Parker will be out the next week. I have seen it--already three
   hundred and thirty pages and it will be much more. (It was five
   hundred twenty-eight pages.) I perceive by what I have read that it
   is the rudest book, one or other, that ever was published, I may say
   since the first invention of printing. Although it handles me so
   roughly, yet I am not at all amated by it. But I must desire the
   advice of some few friends to tell me whether it will be proper for
   me and in what way to answer it. However I will for mine own private
   satisfaction forthwith draw up an answer that shall have as much of
   spirit and solidity in it as my ability will afford and the age we
   live in will endure. I am, if I may say it with reverence, drawn in I
   hope by a good Providence to intermeddle on a noble and high
   argument. But I desire that all the discourse of my friends may run
   as if no answer ought to be expected to so scurrilous a
   book."--(_Hist. MSS. Comm., Portland Papers_, iii. 337.)

The title-page of the Second Part of the _Rehearsal Transprosed_ is a
curiosity:--

      THE
      REHEARSALL
      TRANSPROS'D:

             *       *       *       *       *

      THE SECOND PART.

             *       *       *       *       *

      Occasioned by Two Letters: The first Printed
        by a nameless Author, Intituled, A
        Reproof, etc.

      The Second Letter left for me at a Friends
        House, Dated Nov. 3, 1673. Subscribed
        J.G. and concluding with these words;
        If thou darest to Print or Publish any
        Lie or Libel against Doctor Parker, By
        the Eternal God I will cut thy Throat.

             *       *       *       *       *

      Answered by ANDREW MARVEL.

             *       *       *       *       *

      LONDON,

      Printed for Nathaniel Ponder at the Peacock
      in Chancery Lane near Fleet-Street, 1673.

The _Second Part_ is an exceedingly witty though too lengthy a
performance. Marvell's "companion picture" of Parker is full of matter,
and of the very spirit of the times. Some of it must be given:--

   "But though he came of a good mother, he had a very ill sire. He was
   a man bred toward the Law, and betook himself, as his best practice,
   to be a sub-committee-man, or, as the stile ran, one of the Assistant
   Committee in Northamptonshire. In the rapine of that employment, and
   what he got by picking the teeth of his masters, he sustain'd himself
   till he had raked together some little estate. And then, being a man
   for the purpose, and that had begun his fortune out of the
   sequestration of the estates of the King's Party, he, to perfect it
   the more, proceeded to take away their lives; not in the hot and
   military way (which diminishes always the offence), but in the cooler
   blood and sedentary execution of an High Court of Justice.
   Accordingly he was preferr'd to be one of that number that gave
   sentence against the three Lords, Capel, Holland, and Hamilton, who
   were beheaded. By this learning in the Law he became worthy of the
   degree of a serjeant, and sometimes to go the Circuit, till for
   misdemeanor he was petition'd against. But for a taste of his
   abilities, and the more to reingratiate himself, he printed, in the
   year 1650, a very remarkable Book, called 'The Government of the
   People of England, precedent and present the same. _Ad subscribentes
   confirmandum, Dubitantes informandum, Opponentes convincendum_; and
   underneath _Multa videntur quae non sunt, multa sunt quae non
   videntur_. Under that ingraven two hands joyn'd, with the motto, _Ut
   uniamur_; and beneath a sheaf of arrows, with this device, _Vis unita
   fortior_; and to conclude, _Concordia parvae res crescunt discordia
   dilabuntur_.' A most hieroglyphical title, and sufficient to have
   supplied the mantlings and atchievements of the family! By these
   parents he was sent to Oxford, with intention to breed him up to the
   ministry. There in a short time he enter'd himself into the company
   of some young students who were used to fast and pray weekly
   together; but for their refection fed sometimes on broth, from whence
   they were commonly called Grewellers; only it was observed that he
   was wont still to put more graves than all the rest in his porridge.
   And after that he pick'd acquaintance not only with the brotherhood
   at Wadham Colledge, but with the sisterhood too, at another old
   Elsibeth's, one Elizabeth Hampton's, a plain devout woman, where he
   train'd himself up in hearing their sermons and prayers, receiving
   also the Sacrament in the house, till he had gain'd such proficience,
   that he too began to exercise in that Meeting, and was esteem'd one
   of the preciousest young men in the University. But when thus, after
   several years' approbation, he was even ready to have taken the
   charge, not of an 'admiring drove or heard,' as he now calls them,
   but of a flock upon him, by great misfortune the King came in by the
   miraculous providence of God, influencing the distractions of some,
   the good affections of others, and the weariness of all towards that
   happy Restauration, after so many sufferings, to his regal crown and
   dignity. Nevertheless he broke not off yet from his former habitudes;
   and though it were now too late to obviate this inconvenience, yet he
   persisted as far as in him was--that is, by praying, caballing, and
   discoursing--to obstruct the restoring of the episcopal government,
   revenues, and authority. Insomuch that, finding himself
   discountenanced on those accounts by the then Warden of Wadham, he
   shifted colledges to Trinity, and, when there, went away without his
   degree, scrupling, forsooth, the Subscription then required. From
   thence he came to London, where he spent a considerable time in
   creeping into all corners and companies, horoscoping up and down
   concerning the duration of the Government; not considering anything
   as best, but as most lasting and most profitable. And after having
   many times cast a figure, he at last satisfyed himself that the
   Episcopal Government would endure as long as this King lived; and
   from thence forward cast about how to be admitted into the Church of
   England, and find the highway to her preferments. In order to this he
   daily enlarged, not only his conversation, but his conscience, and
   was made free of some of the town-vices; imagining, like Muleasses
   King of Tunis (for I take witness that on all occasions I treat him
   rather above his quality than otherwise), that by hiding himself
   among the onions, he should escape being traced by his perfumes.
   Ignorant and mistaken man, that thought it necessary to part with any
   virtue to get a living; or that the Church of England did not require
   and incourage more sobriety than he could ever be guilty of; whereas
   it hath alwayes been fruitful of men who, together with obedience to
   that discipline, have lived to the envy of the Nonconformists in
   their conversation, and without such could never either have been
   preserved so long, or after so long a dissipation have ever
   recover'd. But neither was this yet, in his opinion, sufficient; and
   therefore he resolv'd to try a shorter path, which some few men had
   trod not unsuccessfully; that is, to print a Book; if that would not
   do, a second; if not that, a third of an higher extraction, and so
   forward, to give experiment against their former party of a keen
   stile and a ductile judgment. His first proof-piece was in the year
   1665, the _Tentamina Physico-Theologica_; a tedious transcript of his
   common-place book, wherein there is very little of his own, but the
   arrogance and the unparalleled censoriousness that he exercises over
   all other Writers. When he had cook'd up these musty collections, he
   makes his first invitation to his 'old acquaintance' my lord
   Archbishop of Canterbury, who had never seen before nor heard of him.
   But I must confess he furbishes-up his Grace in so glorious an
   Epistle, that had not my Lord been long since proof against the most
   spiritual flattery, the Dedication only, without ever reading the
   Book, might have serv'd to have fix'd him from that instant as his
   favourite. Yet all this I perceive did not his work, but his Grace
   was so unmindful, or rather so prudent, that the gentleman thought it
   necessary to spur-up again the next year with another new Book, to
   show more plainly what he would be at. This he dedicates to Doctor
   Bathurst; and to evidence from the very Epistle that he was ready to
   renounce that very education, the civility of which he is so tender
   of as to blame me for disordering it, he picks occasion to tell him:
   'to your prevailing advice, Sir, do I owe my first rescue from the
   chains and fetters of an unhappy education.' But in the Book, which
   he calls 'A free and impartial Censure of the Platonick Philosophy'
   (censure 'tis sure to be, whatsoever he writes), he speaks out, and
   demonstrates himself ready and equipp'd to surrender not only the
   Cause, but betray his Party without making any conditions for them,
   and to appear forthwith himself in the head of the contrary interest.
   Which, supposing the dispute to be just, yet in him was so mercenary,
   that none would have descended to act his part but a divine of
   fortune. And even lawyers take themselves excused from being of
   counsel for the King himself, in a cause where they have been
   entertain'd and instructed by their client. But so flippant he was
   and forward in this book, that in despight of all chronology, he
   could introduce Plato to inveigh against Calvin, and from the
   Platoniques he could miraculously hook-in a Discourse against the
   Nonconformists. (_Cens. Plat. Phil._, pp. 26, 27, 28, etc.) After
   this feat of activity he was ready to leap over the moon; no scruple
   of conscience could stand in his way, and no preferment seemed too
   high for him; for about this time, I find that having taken a turn at
   Cambridge to qualifie himself, he was received within doors to be my
   Lord Archbishop's other chaplain, and into some degree of favour;
   which, considering the difference of their humours and ages, was
   somewhat surprizing. But whether indeed, in times of heat and
   faction, the most temperate spirits may sometimes chance to take
   delight in one that is spightful, and make some use of him; or
   whether it be that even the most grave and serious persons do for
   relaxation divert themselves willingly by whiles with a creature that
   is unlucky, inimical, and gamesome,--so it was. And thenceforward the
   nimble gentleman danced upon bell-ropes, vaulted from steeple to
   steeple, and cut capers out of one dignity to another. Having thus
   dexterously stuck his groat in Lambeth wainscot, it may easily be
   conceived he would be unwilling to lose it; and therefore he
   concern'd himself highly, and even to jealousie, in upholding now
   that palace, which, if falling, he would out of instinct be the first
   should leave it. His Majesty about that time labouring to effect his
   constant promises of Indulgence to his people, the Author therefore
   walking with his own shadow in the evening, took a great fright lest
   all were agoe. And in this conceit being resolv'd to make good his
   figure, and that one government should not last any longer than the
   other, he set himself to write those dangerous Books which I have now
   to do with; wherein he first makes all that he will to be Law, and
   then whatsoever is Law to be Divinity."[176:1]

The Second Part is not all raillery. There is much wisdom in it and a
trace of Machiavelli:--

   "But because you are subject to misconstrue even true English, I will
   explain my self as distinctly as I can, and as close as possible,
   what is mine own opinion in this matter of the magistrate and
   government; that, seeing I have blamed you where I thought you
   blame-worthy, you may have as fair hold of me too, if you can find
   where to fix your accusation.

   "The power of the magistrate does most certainly issue from the
   divine authority. The obedience due to that power is by divine
   command; and subjects are bound, both as men and as Christians, to
   obey the magistrate actively in all things where their duty to God
   intercedes not, and however passively, that is, either by leaving
   their countrey, or if they cannot do that (the magistrate, or the
   reason of their own occasions hindring them), then by suffering
   patiently at home, without giving the least publick disturbance. But
   the dispute concerning the magistrate's power ought to be
   superfluous; for that it is certainly founded upon his commission
   from God, and for the most part sufficiently fortified with all
   humane advantages. There are few soveraign princes so abridged, but
   that, if they be not contented, they may envy their own fortune. But
   the modester question (if men will needs be medling with matters
   above them) would be, how far it is advisable for a prince to exert
   and push the rigour of that power which no man can deny him; for
   princes, as they derive the right of succession from their ancestors,
   so they inherit from that ancient and illustrious extraction a
   generosity that runs in the blood above the allay of the rest of
   mankind. And being moreover at so much ease of honour and fortune,
   that they are free from the gripes of avarice and twinges of
   ambition, they are the more disposed to an universal benignity
   toward their subjects. What prince that sees so many millions of men,
   either labouring industriously toward his revenue, or adventuring
   their lives in his service, and all of them performing his commands
   with a religious obedience, but conceives at the same time a
   relenting tenderness over them, whereof others out of the narrowness
   of their minds cannot be capable? But whoever shall cast his eye
   thorow the history of all ages, will find that nothing has alwayes
   succeeded better with princes then the clemency of government; and
   that those, on the contrary, who have taken the sanguinary course,
   have been unfortunate to themselves and the people, the consequences
   not being separable. For whether that royal and magnanimous
   gentleness spring from a propensity of their nature, or be acquired
   and confirmed by good and prudent consideration, it draws along with
   it all the effects of Policy. The wealth of a shepherd depends upon
   the multitude of his flock, the goodness of their pasture, and the
   quietness of their feeding; and princes, whose dominion over mankind
   resembles in some measure that of men over other creatures, cannot
   expect any considerable increase to themselves, if by continual
   terrour they amaze, shatter, and hare their people, driving them into
   woods, and running them upon precipices. If men do but compute how
   charming an efficacy one word, and more, one good action has from a
   superior upon those under him, it can scarce be reckon'd how powerful
   a magick there is in a prince who shall, by a constant tenour of
   humanity in government, go on daily gaining upon the affections of
   his people. There is not any privilege so dear, but it may be
   extorted from subjects by good usage, and by keeping them alwayes up
   in their good humour. I will not say what one prince may compass
   within his own time, or what a second, though surely much may be
   done; but it is enough if a great and durable design be accomplish'd
   in the third life; and supposing an hereditary succession of any
   three taking up still where the other left, and dealing still in that
   fair and tender way of management, it is impossible but that, even
   without reach or intention upon the prince's part, all should fall
   into his hand, and in so short a time the very memory or thoughts of
   any such thing as publick liberty would, as it were by consent,
   expire and be for ever extinguish'd. So that whatever the power of
   the magistrate be in the institution, it is much safer for them not
   to do that with the left hand which they may do with the right, nor
   by an extraordinary, what they may effect by the ordinary, way of
   government. A prince that goes to the top of his power is like him
   that shall go to the bottom of his treasure."[178:1]

And as for the "common people" he has this to say:--

   "Yet neither do they want the use of reason, and perhaps their
   aggregated judgment discerns most truly the errours of government,
   forasmuch as they are the first, to be sure, that smart under them.
   In this only they come to be short-sighted, that though they know the
   diseases, they understand not the remedies; and though good patients,
   they are ill physicians. The magistrate only is authorized,
   qualified, and capable to make a just and effectual Reformation, and
   especially among the Ecclesiasticks. For in all experience, as far as
   I can remember, they have never been forward to save the prince that
   labour. If they had, there would have been no Wickliffe, no Husse, no
   Luther in history. Or at least, upon so notable an emergency as the
   last, the Church of Rome would then in the Council of Trent have
   thought of rectifying itself in good earnest, that it might have
   recover'd its ancient character; whereas it left the same divisions
   much wider, and the Christian people of the world to suffer,
   Protestants under Popish governors, Popish under Protestants, rather
   than let go any point of interested ambition."[178:2]


FOOTNOTES:

[152:1] "But the most virulent of all that writ against the sect was
Parker, afterwards made Bishop of Oxford by King James: who was full of
satirical vivacity and was considerably learned, but was a man of no
judgment and of as little virtue, and as to religion rather impious:
after he had for some years entertained the nation with several virulent
books writ with much life, he was attacked by the liveliest droll of the
age, who writ in a burlesque strain but with so peculiar and
entertaining a conduct that from the King down to the tradesman his
books were read with great pleasure, that not only humbled Parker but
the whole party, for the author of the _Rehearsal Transprosed_ had all
the men of wit (or as the French phrase it all the laughers) on his
side."--Burnet's _History of his Own Time_.

[152:2] See the dedication to _A Free and Impartial Censure of the
Plutonick Philosophy_, by Sam Parker, A.M., Oxford 1666. Parker was a
man of some taste, and I have in my small collection a beautifully bound
copy of this treatise presented by the author to Seth Ward, then Bishop
of Exeter, and afterwards of Salisbury.

[165:1] Grosart, vol. iii. pp. 145-8.

[166:1] Grosart, vol. iii. pp. 155-9.

[167:1] Grosart, vol. iii. pp. 170, 210-1.

[167:2] Grosart, vol. iii. p. 211.

[168:1] Grosart, vol. iii. p. 171.

[168:2] Grosart, vol. iii. p. 63.

[169:1] Grosart, vol. iii. p. 198.

[170:1] For a still more unfriendly sketch of Andrew Marvell by the same
spiteful hand, see Parker's _History of his Own Time_, a posthumous
work, first published in Latin in 1726, and in an English Translation by
_Thomas Newlin_ in 1727. This book contains an interesting enumeration
of the numerous conspiracies against the life and throne of Charles the
Second during the earlier part of his reign, a panegyric upon Archbishop
Sheldon and plentiful abuse of Andrew Marvell. Parker died in unhappy
circumstances (see Macaulay's _History_, vol. ii. p. 205), but he left
behind him a pious nonjuring son, and his grandson founded the famous
publishing firm at Oxford.

[176:1] Grosart, vol. iii. p. 284.

[178:1] Grosart, vol. iii. p. 370.

[178:2] _Ibid._, p. 382.




CHAPTER VI

LAST YEARS IN THE HOUSE OF COMMONS


Marvell's last ten years in the House of Commons were made miserable by
the passionate conviction that there existed in high quarters of the
State a deep, dangerous, and well-considered plot to subvert the
Protestant faith and to destroy by armed force Parliamentary Government
in England. Marvell was not the victim of a delusion. Such a plot, plan,
or purpose undoubtedly existed, though, as it failed, it is now easy to
consider the alarm it created to have been exaggerated.

Marvell was, of all public men then living, the one most deeply imbued
with the spirit of our free constitution. Its checks and balances jumped
with his humour. His nature was without any taint of fanaticism, nor was
he anything of the doctrinaire. He was neither a Richard Baxter nor a
John Locke. He had none of the pure Erastianism of Selden, who tells us
in his inimitable, cold-blooded way that "a King is a King men have made
for their own sakes, for quietness' sake." "Just as in a family one man
is appointed to buy the meat," and that "there is no such thing as
spiritual jurisdiction; all is civil, the Church's is the same with the
Lord Mayor's. The Pope he challenges jurisdiction over all; the Bishops
they pretend to it as well as he; the Presbyterians they would have it
to themselves, but over whom is all this, the poor layman" (see Selden's
_Table Talk_).

This may be excellent good sense but it does not represent Marvell's
way of looking at things. He thought more nobly of both church and king.

In Marvell's last book, his famous pamphlet "_An Account of the Growth
of Popery and Arbitrary Government in England," printed at Amsterdam and
recommended to the reading of all English Protestants_, 1678, which made
a prodigious stir and (it is sad to think) paved the way for the "Popish
Plot," Marvell sets forth his view of our constitution in language as
lofty as it is precise. I know no passage in any of our institutional
writers of equal merit.

   "For if first we consider the State, the kings of England rule not
   upon the same terms with those of our neighbour nations, who, having
   by force or by address usurped that due share which their people had
   in the government, are now for some ages in the possession of an
   arbitrary power (which yet no prescription can make legal) and
   exercise it over their persons and estates in a most tyrannical
   manner. But here the subjects retain their proportion in the
   Legislature; the very meanest commoner of England is represented in
   Parliament, and is a party to those laws by which the Prince is sworn
   to govern himself and his people. No money is to be levied but by the
   common consent. No man is for life, limb, goods, or liberty, at the
   Sovereign's discretion: but we have the same right (modestly
   understood) in our propriety that the prince hath in his regality:
   and in all cases where the King is concerned, we have our just remedy
   as against any private person of the neighbourhood, in the Courts of
   Westminster Hall or in the High Court of Parliament. His very
   Prerogative is no more than what the Law has determined. His Broad
   Seal, which is the legitimate stamp of his pleasure, yet is no longer
   currant, than upon the trial it is found to be legal. He cannot
   commit any person by his particular warrant. He cannot himself be
   witness in any cause: the balance of publick justice being so
   delicate, that not the hand only but even the breath of the Prince
   would turn the scale. Nothing is left to the King's will, but all is
   subjected to his authority: by which means it follows that he can do
   no wrong, nor can he receive wrong; and a King of England keeping to
   these measures, may without arrogance, be said to remain the onely
   intelligent Ruler over a rational People. In recompense therefore and
   acknowledgment of so good a Government under his influence, his
   person is most sacred and inviolable; and whatsoever excesses are
   committed against so high a trust, nothing of them is imputed to him,
   as being free from the necessity or temptation; but his ministers
   only are accountable for all, and must answer it at their perils. He
   hath a vast revenue constantly arising from the hearth of the
   Householder, the sweat of the Labourer, the rent of the Farmer, the
   industry of the Merchant, and consequently out of the estate of the
   Gentleman: a large competence to defray the ordinary expense of the
   Crown, and maintain its lustre. And if any extraordinary occasion
   happen, or be but with any probable decency pretended, the whole Land
   at whatsoever season of the year does yield him a plentiful harvest.
   So forward are his people's affections to give even to superfluity,
   that a forainer (or Englishman that hath been long abroad) would
   think they could neither will nor chuse, but that the asking of a
   supply were a meer formality, it is so readily granted. He is the
   fountain of all honours, and has moreover the distribution of so many
   profitable offices of the Household, of the Revenue, of State, of
   Law, of Religion, of the Navy and (since his present Majestie's time)
   of the Army, that it seems as if the Nation could scarce furnish
   honest men enow to supply all those imployments. So that the Kings of
   England are in nothing inferiour to other Princes, save in being more
   abridged from injuring their own subjects: but have as large a field
   as any of external felicity, wherein to exercise their own virtue,
   and so reward and incourage it in others. In short, there is nothing
   that comes nearer in Government to the Divine Perfection, than where
   the Monarch, as with us, injoys a capacity of doing all the good
   imaginable to mankind, under a disability to all that is
   evil."[181:1]

This was the constitution which Marvell, whose means of information
were great and whose curiosity was insatiable, believed to be in danger.
No wonder he was agitated.

The politics in which Marvell was immersed during his last years are
difficult to unravel and still more difficult to illuminate, for they
had their dim origin in the secret thoughts and wavering purposes of the
king.

Charles the Second, like many another Englishman guiltless of Stuart
blood in his veins, was mainly governed by his dislikes, his pleasures,
and his financial necessities. To suppose, as some hasty moralisers have
done, that Charles cared for nothing but his women is to misread his
character. He had many qualifications to be the chief magistrate of a
nation of shopkeepers. He was ever alive to the supreme importance of
English trade upon the high seas. His thoughts were often turned in the
direction of the Indies, east and west. He took a constant, though not
always an honest, interest in the navy. He hated Holland for more
reasons than one, but among these reasons was his hatred of England's
most formidable and malicious trade competitor. He also disliked her
arid and ugly Protestantism, and blood being thicker than water, he
hated Holland for what he considered her shabby treatment of his
youthful nephew, whose ultimate destiny was happily hidden from
Whitehall. Among Charles's many dislikes must be included the Anglican
bishops, who had prevented him from keeping his word, and foiled his
purpose of a wide toleration. He envied his brother of France the wide
culture, the literature and art of Catholicism. He regretted the
Reformation, and would have been best pleased to see the English Church
in communion with Rome and in possession of "Anglican liberties" akin
to those enjoyed by the Gallican Church. Charles was also jealous of
Louis the Fourteenth, and in many moods had no mind to play perpetually
a second fiddle. He longed for a navy to sweep the seas, for an army
strong enough to keep his Parliament in check, and for liberty for
himself and for all those of his subjects who were so minded, to hear
Mass on Sundays. Behind, and above, and always surrounding these desires
and dislikes, was an ever-present, ever-pressing need for money. Like a
royal Becky Sharp, Charles might have found it easy to be a patriotic
king on five millions a year.

The king was his own Foreign Minister, and being what he was, and swayed
by the considerations I have imperfectly described, his foreign policy
was necessarily tortuous and perplexing. As Ranke says, "Charles was
capable of proposing offensive alliances to the three neighbouring
powers, to the Dutch against France, to the French against Spain and
Holland, to the Spaniards against France to the detriment of Holland,
but in these propositions two fundamental views always recur--demands
for money, and assurance of world-wide commerce for England."[183:1]

Charles first allowed Sir William Temple, a cool, prudent man, to form,
in a famous five days' negotiation, the defensive treaty with Holland,
which, after Sweden had joined it, became known as the Triple Alliance
(1668). This alliance had for its objects mutual promises between the
contracting parties to come to each other's assistance by sea and land
if attacked by any power (France being here intended), to force Spain to
make peace with France on the terms already offered, and to compel
France to keep those terms when agreed to by Spain.

The Triple Alliance was not only very popular in England, but was good
diplomacy, for it was quite within the range of practical politics that
France and Holland might have combined against England; nor could it
easily be maintained that the alliance was hostile to France, as it
provided that Spain should be forced to accept the terms France had
already proposed.

What wrecked the Triple Alliance and prepared the way for the secret
Treaty of Dover (1670), was the impossibility of settling those
religious difficulties which, despite the Act of Uniformity, were more
rampant than ever. The king wanted to patch up peace, and to secure some
working plan of comprehension or composure, under cover of which the
Catholic religion should be tolerated and Presbyterianism formally
recognised. But, king though he was, he could not get his way. The
Church and the House of Commons, full as the latter was of his pimps and
pensioners, were as obstinate as mules in this matter of toleration.
They would neither favour Papists nor Dissenters, protested against
Indulgences as unconstitutional, and clamoured for a rigorous
administration of that penal legislation against Nonconformists which
they had purchased with so many and such lavish supplies. As a matter of
fact, these penal laws were very fitfully enforced. In London they were
often totally disregarded, and we read of congregations numbering two
thousand openly attending Presbyterian services. The Lord Mayor for the
time being took his orders direct from the king.

What was Charles to do? After the fall of Clarendon, the king's
favourite privy councillors, called the "Cabal," because the initial
letters of their names formed a word which for some time previously had
been in common use, represent only too faithfully the confusion and
corruption of the times. Clifford was a zealous Roman, Arlington a
cautious one, Buckingham a free-thinker and mocker, friendly to France
and on good terms with the more advanced English sectaries; Ashley made
no pretence to be a Christian, but favoured philosophic toleration;
whilst Lauderdale, one of the most learned ministers that ever sat in
council (so Ranke says[185:1]), was, as a matter of profession, a
Presbyterian, but in reality a man wholly and slavishly devoted to the
king's interests, and prepared at any moment to pour into the kingdom
soldiers from Scotland to purge or suppress all Free Institutions.

Irritated, disgusted, thwarted, and annoyed, the king, acting, it well
may be, under the influence of his accomplished sister, the beautiful
and ill-fated Duchess of Orleans, struck up, to use Marvell's own words,
"an invisible league with France." The negotiations were either by word
of mouth or by letters which have been burnt. Dr. Lingard in his history
gives an interesting account of this mysterious transaction. Two things
are apparent as the objects of the Treaty of Dover. The Dutch Republic
is to be destroyed, and the cause of Catholicism in England is to be
promoted and maintained. It was this latter object that seems most to
have excited the hopes of the Duchess of Orleans. A woman's hand is
traceable throughout. Charles promised to profess himself openly a Roman
Catholic at the time that should appear to be most expedient, and
subsequently to that profession he was to join with Louis in making war
upon the Dutch Republic. At the date of this bewildering agreement, it
was high treason by statute even to _say_ that Charles was a Roman
Catholic. In case the king's public conversion should lead to
disturbances, Louis promised an "aid" of two millions of _livres_ and an
armed force of six thousand men. He also agreed to pay the whole cost of
the Dutch War _on land_, and to contribute thirty men-of-war to the
English fleet. Holland once crushed, England's share of the plunder was
to be Walcheren, Sluys, and Cadsand. A remarkable conversion! It is
difficult to suppose that either Charles or Louis were quite serious
over this part of the business. Yet there it is. The Catholic provisions
of the secret Treaty of Dover were only known to Clifford, whose soul
was fired by them, and to Arlington, who did not share the confident
hopes of his co-religionist. Clifford thought there were thousands of
Englishmen "of light and leading" among the English Catholics who would
be both willing and able to assume the burdens of the State and to rally
round a Catholic king. Arlington thought otherwise.

The king's public conversion never took place. No hint was given of any
such impending event. Parliament met on the 24th of October 1670, and
after hearing a good deal about the Triple Alliance and voting large
sums of money, was prorogued in April 1671, and did not meet again till
February 1673.

To pick a quarrel with the Dutch was never difficult. Marvell tells us
how it was done. "A sorry yacht, but bearing the English Jack, in August
1671 sails into the midst of the Dutch fleet, singles out the Admiral,
shooting twice as they call it, sharp upon him. Which must sure have
appeared as ridiculous and unnatural as for a lark to dare the hobby."
The Dutch admiral asking "Why," was told "because he and his whole fleet
had failed to strike sail to his small craft." The Dutch commander then
"civilly excused it as a matter of the first instance, and in which he
could have no instruction, therefore proper to be referred to their
masters, and so they parted. The yacht having thus acquitted itself,
returned fraught with the quarrel she was sent for."[187:1] Surinam was
a perpetual _casus belli_. Some offence against the law of nations was
always happening there. A third matter, very full of gunpowder, was made
great use of by the promoters of the war already agreed upon. A picture
had been hung at Dort representing De Witt sailing up the Medway very
much in the manner described in Marvell's poem. Medals also had been
struck and distributed in commemoration of the same event. War was
declared against Holland by England and France in March 1672. The
Declaration of War was preceded by the Declaration of Indulgence,
whereby, wrote Marvell, "all the penal laws against Papists for which
former Parliaments had given so many supplies, and against
Nonconformists for which this Parliament had paid more largely, were at
one instant suspended in order to defraud the nation of all that
religion which they had so dearly purchased, and for which they ought at
least, the bargain being broke, to have been reimbursed."[187:2]

The unconstitutional suspension of bad laws put lovers of freedom in a
predicament. Marvell was what he calls a "composure," that is a
"comprehension," man. In the _Growth of Popery_ he sorrowfully admits
that it is the gravest reproach of human wisdom that no man seems able
or willing to find out the due temper of Government in divine matters.

   "Insomuch that it is no great adventure to say, that the world was
   better ordered under the ancient monarchies and commonwealths, that
   the number of virtuous men was then greater, and that the Christians
   found fairer quarter under those than among themselves, nor hath
   there any advantage accrued unto mankind from that most perfect and
   practical model of humane society, except the speculation of a better
   way to future happiness, concerning which the very guides disagree,
   and of those few that follow, it will suffer no man to pass without
   paying at their turnpikes." (Vol. iv. p. 280.)

The French Alliance made the war, though with Holland, unpopular.
Writers had to be hired to defend it. France was supposed to look on
with much composure as her two maritime competitors battered each
other's fleets. At sea the honours were divided between the Dutch and
the English. On land Louis had it all his own way. Besides, rumours got
abroad of an uncomfortable plot to restore Popery. Jesuits seemed to
abound. Roman Catholics asserted themselves, the laws being suspended.
An army was collected at Blackheath. The Treasury was closed. Charles
had been badly bled by the goldsmiths or bankers, who had charged him
£12 per cent.; but in commercial centres Acts of Bankruptcy are seldom
popular, and though the bankers were compelled to be content with £6 per
cent., the closing of the Treasury brought ruin into many homes.

When Parliament met in February 1673, its temper was bad. It would have
nothing to do with the Declaration of Indulgence, and though the king
had told them, in the round set terms he could so well command, that he
was resolved to stick to his declaration, he had to give way and to see
the House busy itself with a Test Bill that drove all Roman Catholics,
from the Duke of York (who had "gone over" in the spring of 1672)
downwards, out of office. The only effect of Charles's policy was to
mitigate the hostility of the House of Commons to Protestant Dissenters,
and to drive it to concentrate its jealousy upon the Catholics. Any
lurking idea of the king declaring himself a Romanist had to be
abandoned. His hatred of Parliament increased. He lost all sense of
shame, and frankly became a pensioner of France. In 1676 he concluded a
second secret treaty, whereby both Louis and himself bound themselves to
enter into no engagements with other powers without consent, and in case
of rebellion within their realms to come to each other's assistance.
Louis agreed to make Charles an annual allowance of a hundred thousand,
afterwards increased to two hundred thousand _livres_. This money was
largely spent in bribing the House of Commons. The French ambassador was
allowed an extra grant of a thousand crowns a month to keep a table for
hungry legislators.[189:1] Did not Marvell do well to be angry?

Some of Marvell's letters belonging to this gloomy period are full of
interest.


   _To William Ramsden, Esq._
                                                     "_Nov. 28, 1670._

   "DEAR WILL,--I need not tell you I am always thinking of you. All
   that has happened, which is remarkable, since I wrote, is as
   follows: The Lieutenancy of London, chiefly Sterlin the Mayor, and
   Sir J. Robinson, alarmed the King continually with the Conventicles
   there. So the King sent them strict and large powers. The Duke of
   York every Sunday would come over thence to look to the peace. To
   say truth, they met in numerous open assemblys, without any dread of
   government. But the train bands in the city, and soldiery in
   Southwark and suburbs, harassed and abused them continually; they
   wounded many, and killed some Quakers especially, while they took
   all patiently. Hence arose two things of great remark. The
   Lieutenancy, having got orders to their mind, pick out Hays and
   Jekill, the innocentist of the whole party, to show their power on.
   They offer them illegal bonds of five thousand pounds a man, which
   if they would not enter into, they must go to prison. So they were
   committed, and at last (but it is a very long story) got free. Some
   friends engaged for them. The other was the tryal of Pen and Mead,
   quakers, at the Old Baily. The jury not finding them guilty, as the
   Recorder and Mayor would have had them, they were kept without meat
   or drink some three days, till almost starved, but would not alter
   their verdict; so fined and imprisoned. There is a book out which
   relates all the passages, which were very pertinent, of the
   prisoners, but prodigiously barbarous by the Mayor and Recorder. The
   Recorder, among the rest, commended the Spanish Inquisition, saying
   it would never be well till we had something like it. The King had
   occasion for sixty thousand pounds. Sent to borrow it of the city.
   Sterlin, Robinson, and all the rest of that faction, were at it many
   a week, and could not get above ten thousand. The fanatics under
   persecution, served his Majesty. The other party, both in court and
   city, would have prevented it. But the King protested mony would be
   acceptable. So the King patched up, out of the Chamber, and other
   ways, twenty thousand pounds. The fanatics, of all sorts, forty
   thousand. The King, though against many of his council, would have
   the Parliament sit this twenty-fourth of October. He, and the Keeper
   spoke of nothing but to have mony. Some one million three hundred
   thousand pounds, to pay off the debts at interest; and eight hundred
   thousand for a brave navy next Spring. Both speeches forbid to be
   printed, for the King said very little, and the Keeper, it was
   thought, too much in his politic simple discourse of foreign
   affairs. The House was thin and obsequious. They voted at first they
   would supply him according to his occasions, _Nemine_, as it was
   remarked, _contradicente_; but few affirmatives, rather a silence as
   of men ashamed and unwilling. Sir R. Howard, Seymour, Temple, Car,
   and Hollis, openly took leave of their former party, and fell to
   head the King's busyness. There is like to be a terrible Act of
   Conventicles. The Prince of Orange here is much made of. The King
   owes him a great deal of mony. The Paper is full.--I am yours," etc.

The trial of William Penn and William Mead at the Old Bailey for a
tumultuous assembly, written by themselves, may be read in the _State
Trials_, vol. vi. The trial was the occasion of Penn's famous remark to
the Recorder of London, who, driven wellnigh distracted by Penn's
dialectics, exclaimed, "If I should suffer you to ask questions till
to-morrow morning you would never be the wiser." "That," replied Penn,
"would be according as the answers are."


   _To William Ramsden, Esq._
                                                            (Undated.)

   "DEAR WILL,--The Parliament are still proceeding, but not much
   advanced on their eight hundred thousand pounds Bill on money at
   interest, offices, and lands; and the Excise Bills valued at four
   hundred thousand pounds a year. The first for the navy, which scarce
   will be set out. The last to be for paying one million three hundred
   thousand pounds, which the King owes at interest, and perhaps may be
   given for four, five, or six years, as the House chances to be in
   humour. But an accident happened which liked to have spoiled all:
   Sir John Coventry having moved for an imposition on the playhouses,
   Sir John Berkenhead, to excuse them, sayed they had been of great
   service to the King. Upon which Sir John Coventry desired that
   gentleman to explain whether he meant the men or the women players.
   Hereupon it is imagined, that, the House adjourning from Tuesday
   before till Thursday after Christmas-day, on the very Tuesday night
   of the adjournment, twenty-five of the Duke of Monmouth's troop, and
   some few foot, layed in wait from ten at night till two in the
   morning, by Suffolk-street, and as he returned from the Cock, where
   he supped, to his own house, they threw him down, and with a knife
   cut off almost the end of his nose; but company coming made them
   fearful to finish it, so they marched off. Sir Thomas Sands,
   lieutenant of the troop, commanded the party; and O'Brian, the Earl
   of Inchequin's son, was a principal actor. The Court hereupon
   sometimes thought to carry it with a high hand, and question Sir
   John for his words, and maintain the action. Sometimes they flagged
   in their counsels. However, the King commanded Sir Thomas Clarges,
   and Sir W. Pultney, to release Wroth and Lake, who were two of the
   actors, and taken. But the night before the House met they
   surrendered them again. The House being but sullen the next day, the
   Court did not oppose adjourning for some days longer till it was
   filled. Then the House went upon Coventry's busyness, and voted that
   they would go upon nothing else whatever till they had passed a
   Bill, as they did, for Sands, O'Brian, Parry, and Reeves, to come in
   by the sixteenth of February, or else be condemned, and never to be
   pardoned, but by an express Act of Parliament, and their names
   therein inserted, for fear of being pardoned in some general act of
   grace. Farther of all such actions, for the future on any man,
   felony, without clergy; and who shall otherwise strike or wound any
   parliament-man, during his attendance, or going or coming,
   imprisonment for a year, treble damages, and incapacity. This Bill
   having in some few days been dispatched to the Lords, the House has
   since gone on in grand Committee upon the first eight hundred
   thousand pounds Bill, but are not yet half way. But now the Lords,
   instead of the sixteenth of February, put twenty-five days after the
   King's royal assent, and that registered in their journal; they
   disagree in several other things, but adhere in that first, which is
   most material. Adhere, in this place, signifies not to be retracted,
   and excludes a free conference. So that this week the Houses will be
   in danger of splitting, without much wisdom or force. For
   considering that Sir Thomas Sands was the very person sent to
   Clarges and Pultney, that O'Brian was concealed in the Duke of
   Monmouth's lodgings, that Wroth and Lake were bayled at the sessions
   by order from Mr. Attorney, and that all persons and things are
   perfectly discovered, that act will not be passed without great
   consequence. George's father obliges you much in Tangier. Prince
   Edgar is dying. The Court is at the highest pitch of want and
   luxury, and the people full of discontent, Remember me to
   yourselves."


   _To William Ramsden, Esq._
                                                            (Undated.)

   "DEAR WILL,--I think I have not told you that, on our Bill of
   Subsidy, the Lord Lucas made a fervent bold speech against our
   prodigality in giving, and the weak looseness of the government, the
   King being present; and the Lord Clare another to persuade the King
   that he ought not to be present. But all this had little
   encouragement, not being seconded. Copys going about everywhere, one
   of them was brought into the Lords' House, and Lord Lucas was asked
   whether it was his. He sayd part was, and part was not. Thereupon
   they took advantage, and sayed it was a libel even against Lucas
   himself. On this they voted it a libel, and to be burned by the
   hangman. Which was done; but the sport was, the hangman burned the
   Lords' order with it. I take the last quarrel betwixt us and the
   Lords to be as the ashes of that speech. Doubtless you have heard,
   before this time, how Monmouth, Albemarle, Dunbane, and seven or
   eight gentlemen, fought with the watch, and killed a poor bedle.
   They have all got their pardons, for Monmouth's sake; but it is an
   act of great scandal. The King of France is at Dunkirke. We have no
   fleet out, though we gave the Subsidy Bill, valued at eight hundred
   thousand pounds, for that purpose. I believe, indeed, he will
   attempt nothing on us, but leave us to dy a natural death. For
   indeed never had poor nation so many complicated, mortal, incurable,
   diseases. You know the Dutchess of York is dead. All gave her for a
   Papist. I think it will be my lot to go on an honest fair employment
   into Ireland. Some have smelt the court of Rome at that distance.
   There I hope I shall be out of the smell of our.... --Yours," etc.


   _To a Friend in Persia._
                                                    "_August 9, 1671._

   "DEAR SIR,--I have yours of the 12th of October 1670, which was in
   all respects most welcome to me, except when I considered that to
   write it you endured some pain, for you say your hand is not yet
   recovered. If I could say any thing to you towards the advancement
   of your affairs, I could, with a better conscience, admit you should
   spend so much of your precious time, as you do, upon me. But you
   know how far those things are out of my road, tho', otherwise, most
   desirous in all things to be serviceable to you. God's good
   providence, which hath through so dangerous a disease and so many
   difficultys preserved and restored you, will, I doubt not, conduct
   you to a prosperous issue, and the perfection of your so laudable
   undertakings. And, under that, your own good genius, in conjunction
   with your brother here, will, I hope, though at the distance of
   England and Persia, in good time operate extraordinary effects; for
   the magnetism of two souls, rightly touched, works beyond all
   natural limits, and it would be indeed too unequal, if good nature
   should not have at least as large a sphere of activity, as malice,
   envy, and detraction, which are, it seems, part of the returns from
   Gombroon and Surat. All I can say to you in that matter is, that you
   must, seeing it will not be better, stand upon your guard; for in
   this world a good cause signifys little, unless it be as well
   defended. A man may starve at the feast of good conscience. My
   fencing master in Spain, after he had instructed me all he could,
   told me, I remember, there was yet one secret, against which there
   was no defence, and that was, to give the first blow. I know your
   maxim, _Qui festinat ditescere, non erit innocens_. Indeed while you
   preserve that mind, you will have the blessing both of God and man.
   In general I perceive, and am very glad of it, that by your good
   management, your friends here get ground, and the flint in your
   adversarys' hearts begins to be mollifyed. Now after my usual
   method, leaving to others what relates to busyness, I address
   myself, which is all I am good for, to be your gazettier. I am sorry
   to perceive that mine by the Armenian miscarryed. Tho' there was
   nothing material in it, the thoughts of friends are too valuable to
   fall into the hands of a stranger. I wrote the last February at
   large, and wish it a better passage. In this perhaps I may interfere
   something with that, chusing rather to repeat than omit. The King
   having, upon pretence of the great preparations of his neighbours,
   demanded three hundred thousand pounds for his navy (though in
   conclusion he hath not set out any) and that the Parliament should
   pay his debts, which the ministers would never particularize to the
   House of Commons, our House gave several bills. You see how far
   things were stretched, though beyond reason, there being no
   satisfaction how those debts were contracted, and all men foreseeing
   that what was given would not be applyed to discharge the debts,
   which I hear are at this day risen to four millions, but diverted as
   formerly. Nevertheless such was the number of the constant courtiers
   increased by the apostate patriots, who were bought off, for that
   turn, some at six, others ten, one at fifteen thousand pounds in
   money, besides what offices, lands, and reversions, to others, that
   it is a mercy they gave not away the whole land, and liberty, of
   England. The Earl of Clare made a very bold and rational harangue,
   the King being present, against the King's sitting among the Lords,
   contrary to former precedents, during their debates; but he was not
   seconded. The King had this April prorogued, upon the Houses
   cavilling, and their harsh conferences concerning some bills, the
   Parliament from this April till the 16th of April 1672. Sir John
   Coventry's Bill against Cutting Noses passed, and O'Brian and Sir
   Thomas Sands, not appearing at the Old Baily by the time limited,
   stand attainted and outlawed, without possibility of pardon. The
   Duke of Buckingham is again one hundred and forty thousand pounds in
   debt, and, by this prorogation, his creditors have time to tear all
   his lands in pieces. The House of Commons has run almost to the end
   of their line, and are grown extreme chargeable to the King, and
   odious to the people. Lord St. John, Marquess of Westminster's son,
   one of the House of Commons, Sir Robert Howard, Sir John Benet, Lord
   Arlington's brother, Sir William Bucknoll, the brewer, all of the
   House, in fellowship with some others of the city, have farmed the
   old customs, with the new act of Imposition upon Wines, and the Wine
   Licenses, at six hundred thousand pounds a year, to begin this
   Michaelmas. You may be sure they have covenants not to be losers.
   They have signed and sealed ten thousand pounds a year more to the
   Duchess of Cleveland, who has likewise near ten thousand pounds a
   year out of the new farm of the country excise of Beer and Ale, five
   thousand pounds a year out of the Post Office, and, they say, the
   reversion of all the King's leases, the reversion of places all in
   the Custom House, the green wax, and indeed, what not? All
   promotions, spiritual and temporal, pass under her cognizance.
   Buckingham runs out of all with the Lady Shrewsbury, by whom he
   believes he had a son, to whom the King stood godfather; it dyed,
   young Earl of Coventry, and was buryed in the sepulchre of his
   fathers. The King of France made a warlike progresse this summer
   through his conquests of Flanders, but kept the peace there, and
   detains still the Dutchy of Lorain, and has stired up the German
   Princes against the free towns. The Duke of Brunswick has taken the
   town of Brunswick; and now the Bishop of Cullen is attacking the
   city of Colen. We truckle to France in all things, to the prejudice
   of our honour. Barclay is still Lieutenant of Ireland; but he was
   forced to come over to pay ten thousand pounds rent to his Landlady
   Cleveland. My Lord Angier, who bought of Sir George Carteret for
   eleven thousand pounds, the Vice-treasurership of Ireland, worth
   five thousand pounds a year, is, betwixt knavery and foolery, turned
   out. Dutchess of York and Prince Edgar, dead. None left but
   daughters. One Blud, outlawed for a plot to take Dublin Castle, and
   who seized on the Duke of Ormond here last year, and might have
   killed him, a most bold, and yet sober fellow, some months ago
   seized the crown and sceptre in the Tower, took them away, and if he
   had killed the keeper, might have carried them clear off. He, being
   taken, astonished the King and Court, with the generosity, and
   wisdom, of his answers. He, and all his accomplices, for his sake,
   are discharged by the King, to the wonder of all.--Yours," etc.


   _To William Ramsden, Esq._
                                                         "_June 1672._

   "DEAR WILL,--Affairs begin to alter, and men talk of a peace with
   Holland, and taking them into our protection; and it is my opinion
   it will be before Michaelmas, for some reasons, not fit to write. We
   cannot have a peace with France and Holland both. The Dutch are now
   brought very low; but Amsterdam, and some other provinces, are
   resolved to stand out till the last. De-wit is stabbed, and dead of
   his wounds. It was at twelve a clock at night, the 11th of this
   month, as he came from the council at the Hague. Four men wounded
   him with their swords. But his own letter next morning to the States
   says nothing appeared mortal. The whole Province of Utrecht is
   yielding up. No man can conceive the condition of the State of
   Holland, in this juncture, unless he can at the same time conceive
   an earthquake, an hurricane, and the deluge. France is potent and
   subtle. Here have been several fires of late. One at St.
   Catherine's, which burned about six score or two hundred houses, and
   some seven or eight ships. Another in Bishopsgate-street. Another in
   Crichet Fryars. Another in Southwark; and some elsewhere. You may be
   sure all the old talk is hereupon revived. There was the other day,
   though not on this occasion, a severe proclamation issued out
   against all who shall vent false news, or discourse ill concerning
   affairs of state. So that in writing to you I run the risque of
   making a breech in the commandment.--Yours," etc.

The following letter deals with another matter of human concern than
politics, for it seeks to condole with a father who has lost an only
son.


   _To Sir John Trott_
                                                            (Undated.)

   "HONOURED SIR,--I have not that vanity to believe, if you weigh your
   late loss by the common ballance, that any thing I can write to you
   should lighten your resentments: nor if you measure things by the
   rules of christianity, do I think it needful to comfort you in your
   duty and your son's happyness. Only having a great esteem and
   affection for you, and the grateful memory of him that is departed
   being still green and fresh upon my spirit, I cannot forbear to
   inquire, how you have stood the second shock at your sad meeting of
   friends in the country. I know that the very sight of those who have
   been witnesses of our better fortune, doth but serve to reinforce a
   calamity. I know the contagion of grief and infection of tears, and
   especially when it runs in a blood. And I myself could sooner imitate
   than blame those innocent relentings of nature, so that they spring
   from tenderness only and humanity, not from an implacable sorrow. The
   tears of a family may flow together like those little drops that
   compact the rainbow, and if they be placed with the same advantage
   towards Heaven as those are to the sun, they too have their
   splendour; and like that bow, while they unbend into seasonable
   showers, yet they promise, that there shall not be a second flood.
   But the dissoluteness of grief, the prodigality of sorrow, is neither
   to be indulged in a man's self, nor complyed with in others. If that
   were allowable in these cases, Eli's was the readyest way and highest
   compliment of mourning, who fell back from his seat and broke his
   neck. But neither does that precedent hold. For though he had been
   Chancellor, and in effect King of Israel, for so many years (and such
   men value, as themselves, their losses at an higher rate than
   others), yet, when he heard that Israel was overcome, that his two
   sons Hophni and Phineas were slain in one day, and saw himself so
   without hope of issue, and which imbittered it farther, without
   succession to the government, yet he fell not till the news that the
   ark of God was taken. I pray God that we may never have the same
   parallel perfected in our publick concernments. Then we shall need
   all the strength of grace and nature to support us. But on a private
   loss, and sweetened with so many circumstances as yours, to be
   impatient, to be uncomfortable would be to dispute with God. Though
   an only son be inestimable, yet it is like Jonah's sin, to be angry
   at God for the withering of his shadow. Zipporah, though the delay
   had almost cost her husband his life, yet, when he did but circumcise
   her son, in a womanish peevishness reproached Moses as a bloody
   husband. But if God take the son himself, but spare the father, shall
   we say that He is a bloody God? He that gave His own son, may He not
   take ours? It is pride that makes a rebel; and nothing but the
   over-weening of ourselves and our own things that raises us against
   Divine Providence. Whereas Abraham's obedience was better than
   sacrifice. And if God please to accept both, it is indeed a farther
   tryal, but a greater honour. I could say over upon this beaten
   occasion most of those lessons of morality and religion which have
   been so often repeated, and are as soon forgotten. We abound with
   precept, but we want examples. You, sir, that have all these things
   in your memory, and the clearness of whose judgment is not to be
   obscured by any greater interposition, should be exemplary to others
   in your own practice. 'Tis true, it is an hard task to learn and
   teach at the same time. And, where yourselves are the experiment, it
   is as if a man should dissect his own body, and read the anatomy
   lecture. But I will not heighten the difficulty while I advise the
   attempt. Only, as in difficult things, you would do well to make use
   of all that may strengthen and assist you; the word of God; the
   society of good men; and the books of the ancients; there is one way
   more, which is by diversion, business, and activity; which are also
   necessary to be used in their season. But I myself, who live to so
   little purpose, can have little authority or ability to advise you in
   it, who are a person that are and may be much more so, generally
   useful. All that I have been able to do since, hath been to write
   this sorry Elogy of your son, which if it be as good as I could wish,
   it is as yet no indecent employment. However, I know you will take
   any thing kindly from your very affectionate friend, and most humble
   servant."

Milton died on the 8th of November 1674. Marvell remained among the
poet's intimate friends until the end, and intended to write his life.
It is idle to mourn the loss of an unwritten book, but Marvell's life of
Milton would have been a treasure.[199:1]

When Parliament met on the 13th of April 1675, members found in their
places a mock-speech from the throne. They _knew_ the hand that had
penned it. It was a daring production and ran as follows:--

   _His Majesty's Most Gracious Speech to Both Houses of Parliament_.

   "MY LORDS AND GENTLEMEN,--I told you at our last meeting, the winter
   was the fittest time for business, and truly I thought so, till my
   Lord Treasurer assured me the spring was the best season for sallads
   and subsidies. I hope therefore that April will not prove so
   unnatural a month, as not to afford some kind showers on my parched
   exchequer, which gapes for want of them. Some of you, perhaps, will
   think it dangerous to make me too rich; but I do not fear it; for I
   promise you faithfully, whatever you give me I will always want; and
   although in other things my word may be thought a slender authority,
   yet in that, you may rely on me, I will never break it.

   "MY LORDS AND GENTLEMEN,--I can bear my straits with patience; but my
   Lord Treasurer does protest to me, that the revenue, as it now
   stands, will not serve him and me too. One of us must pinch for it,
   if you do not help me. I must speak freely to you: I am under bad
   circumstances, for besides my harlots in service, my reformado
   concubines lye heavy upon me. I have a passable good estate, I
   confess, but, God's-fish, I have a great charge upon 't. Here's my
   Lord Treasurer can tell, that all the money designed for next
   summer's guards must, of necessity, be applyed to the next year's
   cradles and swadling-cloths. What shall we do for ships then? I hint
   this only to you, it being your busyness, not mine. I know, by
   experience, I can live without ships. I lived ten years abroad
   without, and never had my health better in my life; but how you will
   be without, I leave to yourselves to judge, and therefore hint this
   only by the bye: I do not insist upon it. There's another thing I
   must press more earnestly, and that is this:--It seems a good part of
   my revenue will expire in two or three years, except you will be
   pleased to continue it. I have to say for 't, pray, why did you give
   me so much as you have done, unless you resolve to give on as fast as
   I call for it? The nation hates you already for giving so much, and
   I'll hate you too, if you do not give me more. So that if you stick
   not to me, you must not have a friend in England. On the other hand,
   if you will give me the revenue I desire, I shall be able to do those
   things for your religion and liberty, that I have had long in my
   thoughts, but cannot effect them without a little more money to carry
   me through. Therefore look to 't and take notice that if you do not
   make me rich enough to undo you, it shall lie at your doors. For my
   part I wash my hands on 't. But that I may gain your good opinion,
   the best way is to acquaint you what I have done to deserve it, out
   of my royal care for your religion and your property. For the first,
   my proclamation is a true picture of my mind, He that cannot, as in a
   glass, see my zeal for the Church of England, does not deserve any
   farther satisfaction, for I declare him wilful, abominable, and not
   good. Some may, perhaps, be startled, and cry, how comes this sudden
   change? To which I answer, I am a changling, and that's sufficient, I
   think. But to convince men farther, that I mean what I say, there are
   these arguments:--

      "First, I tell you so, and you know I never break my word.

      "Secondly, My Lord Treasurer says so, and he never told a lye in
         his life.

      "Thirdly, My Lord Lauderdale will undertake it for me; and I
         should be loath, by any act of mine, he should forfeit the
         credit he has with you.

   "If you desire more instances of my zeal, I have them for you. For
   example, I have converted my natural sons from Popery; and I may say,
   without vanity, it was my own work, so much the more peculiarly mine
   than the begetting them. 'Twould do one's heart good to hear how
   prettily George can read already in the Psalter. They are all fine
   children, God bless 'em, and so like me in their understandings. But,
   as I was saying, I have, to please you, given a pension to your
   favourite my Lord Lauderdale; not so much that I thought he wanted
   it, as that you would take it kindly. I have made Carwell dutchess of
   Portsmouth, and marryed her sister to the Earl of Pembroke. I have,
   at my brother's request, sent my Lord Inchequin into Barbary, to
   settle the Protestant Religion among the Moors, and an English
   Interest at Tangier. I have made Crew Bishop of Durham, and, at the
   first word of my Lady Portsmouth, Prideaux Bishop of Chichester. I
   know not, for my part, what factious men would have; but this I am
   sure of, my predecessors never did anything like this, to gain the
   good will of their subjects. So much for your religion, and now for
   your property. My behaviour to the Bankers is a publick instance; and
   the proceedings between Mrs. Hyde and Mrs. Sutton for private ones,
   are such convincing evidences, that it will be needless to say any
   more to 't.

   "I must now acquaint you, that, by my Lord Treasurer's advice, I have
   made a considerable retrenchment upon my expenses in candles and
   charcoal, and do not intend to stop there, but will, with your help,
   look into the late embezzlements of my dripping-pans and
   kitchen-stuff; of which, by the way, upon my conscience, neither my
   Lord Treasurer nor my Lord Lauderdale are guilty. I tell you my
   opinion; but if you should find them dabling in that busyness, I tell
   you plainly, I leave 'em to you; for, I would have the world to know,
   I am not a man to be cheated.

   "My Lords and Gentlemen, I desire you to believe me as you have found
   me; and I do solemnly promise you, that whatsoever you give me shall
   be specially managed with the same conduct, trust, sincerity, and
   prudence, that I have ever practised, since my happy
   restoration."[202:1]

Mock King's Speeches have often been made, but this is the first, and I
think still the best of them all.

There was no shaking off religion from the debates of those days. A new
Oaths Bill suddenly appeared in the House of Lords, where it gave rise
to one of the greatest debates that assembly has ever witnessed,
lasting seventeen days. The bishops were baited by the peers with great
spirit, and the report of the proceedings may still be read with gusto.

Marvell, in his _Growth of Popery_, thus describes what happened:--

   "While these things were upon the anvil, the 10th of November was
   come for the Parliament's sitting, but that was put off till the 13th
   of April 1675. And in the meantime, which fell out most opportune for
   the conspirators, these counsels were matured, and something further
   to be contrived, that was yet wanting; the Parliament accordingly
   meeting, and the House of Lords, as well as that of the Commons,
   being in deliberation of several wholesome bills, such as the present
   state of the nation required, the great design came out in a bill
   unexpectedly offered one morning in the House of Lords, whereby all
   such as injoyed any beneficial office, or imployment, ecclesiastical,
   civil, or military, to which was added privy counsellors, justices of
   the peace, and members of Parliament, were under a penalty to take
   the oath, and make the declaration, and abhorrence, insuring:--

      'I A.B. do declare, that it is not lawful upon any pretence
         whatsoever to take up arms against the King, and that I do
         abhor that traiterous position of taking arms by his authority
         against his person, or against those that are commissioned by
         him in pursuance of such commission. And I do swear, that I
         will not at any time indeavour the alteration of the government
         either in Church or State. So help me God.'

   "This same oath had been brought into the House of Commons in the
   plague year at Oxford, to have been imposed upon the nation, but
   there, by the assistance of those very same persons that now
   introduce it, 'twas thrown out, for fear of a general infection of
   the vitals of this kingdom; and though it passed then in a particular
   bill, known by the name of the Five Mile Act, because it only
   concerned the non-conformist preachers, yet even in that, it was
   thoroughly opposed by the late Earl of Southampton, whose judgement
   might well have been reckoned for the standard of prudence and
   loyalty."[204:1]

Of the proposed oath Marvell says, "No Conveyancer could ever in more
compendious or binding terms have drawn a dissettlement of the whole
birthright of England."

This was no mere legal quibbling.

   "These things are no niceties, or remote considerations (though in
   making of laws, and which must come afterwards under construction of
   judges, _durante bene placito_, all cases are to be put and imagined)
   but there being an act in Scotland for 20,000 men to march into
   England upon call, and so great a body of English soldiery in France,
   within summons, besides what foreigners may be obliged by treaty to
   furnish, and it being so fresh in memory, what sort of persons had
   lately been in commission among us, to which add the many books then
   printed by license, writ, some by men of the black, one of the green
   cloth, wherein the absoluteness of the English monarchy is against
   all law asserted.

   "All these considerations put together were sufficient to make any
   honest and well advised man to conceive indeed, that upon the passing
   of this oath and declaration, the whole sum of affairs depended.

   "It grew therefore to the greatest contest, that has perhaps ever
   been in Parliament, wherein those Lords, that were against this oath,
   being assured of their own loyalty and merit, stood up now for the
   English liberties with the same genius, virtue, and courage, that
   their noble ancestors had formerly defended the great Charter of
   England, but with so much greater commendation, in that they had here
   a fairer field and a more civil way of decision; they fought it out
   under all the disadvantages imaginable; they were overlaid by
   numbers; the noise of the House, like the wind, was against them, and
   if not the sun, the fireside was always in their faces; nor being so
   few, could they, as their adversaries, withdraw to refresh themselves
   in a whole day's ingagement: yet never was there a clearer
   demonstration how dull a thing is humane eloquence, and greatness
   how little, when the bright truth discovers all things in their
   proper colours and dimensions, and shining, shoots its beams thorow
   all their fallacies. It might be injurious, where all of them did so
   excellently well, to attribute more to any one of those Lords than
   another, unless because the Duke of Buckingham and the Earl of
   Shaftesbury, have been the more reproached for this brave action, it
   be requisite by a double proportion of praise to set them two on
   equal terms with the rest of their companions in honour. The
   particular relation in this debate, which lasted many days, with
   great eagerness on both sides, and the reasons but on one, was in the
   next Session burnt by order of the Lords, but the sparks of it will
   eternally fly in their adversaries' faces."[205:1]

In a letter to his constituents, dated April 22, 1675, Marvell was
content to say: "The Lords sate the whole day yesterday till ten at
night without rising (and the King all the while but of our addresses
present) upon their Bill of Test in both houses and are not yet come to
the question of committing it."

After prolonged discussion the Oath Bill was sent to the Commons, where
doubtless it must have passed, had not a furious privilege quarrel over
Sir John Fagg's case made prorogation in June almost a necessity. In
October Parliament met again, and at once resolved itself into a
Committee upon Religion to prevent the growth of Popery. This time the
king made almost an end of the Parliament by a prorogation which lasted
from November 1675 until February 1677--a period of fifteen months.

On the re-assembling of Parliament the Duke of Buckingham fathered the
argument much used during the long recess, that a prorogation extending
beyond twelve months was in construction of law a dissolution.

For the expression of this opinion and the refusal to recant it the
Duke of Buckingham and three other lords were ordered to the Tower, the
king being greatly angered by the duke's request that his cook might be
allowed to wait on him. On this incident Marvell remarks: "Thus a
prorogation without precedent was to be warranted by an imprisonment
without example. A sad instance! Whereby the dignity of Parliament and
especially of the House of Peers did at present much suffer and may
probably more for the future, _for nothing but Parliament can destroy
Parliament_. If a House shall once be felon of itself and stop its own
breath, taking away that liberty of speech which the King verbally, and
of course, allows them (as now they had done in both houses) to what
purpose is it coming thither?"[206:1]

The character of this House of Commons did not improve with age.

Marvell writes in the _Growth of Popery_:--

   "In matters of money they seem at first difficult, but having been
   discoursed with in private, they are set right, and begin to
   understand it better themselves, and to convert their brethren: for
   they are all of them to be bought and sold, only their number makes
   them cheaper, and each of them doth so overvalue himself, that
   sometimes they outstand or let slip their own market.

   "It is not to be imagined, how small things, in this case, even
   members of great estates will stoop at, and most of them will do as
   much for hopes as others for fruition, but if their patience be tired
   out, they grow at last mutinous, and revolt to the country, till some
   better occasion offer.

   "Among these are some men of the best understanding were they of
   equal integrity, who affect to ingross all business, to be able to
   quash any good motion by parliamentary skill, unless themselves be
   the authors, and to be the leading men of the House, and for their
   natural lives to continue so. But these are men that have been once
   fooled, most of them, and discovered, and slighted at Court, so that
   till some turn of State shall let them in their adversaries' place,
   in the mean time they look sullen, make big motions, and contrive
   specious bills for the subject, yet only wait the opportunity to be
   the instruments of the same counsels which they oppose in others.

   "There is a third part still remaining, but as contrary in themselves
   as light and darkness; those are either the worst, or the best of
   men; the first are most profligate persons, they have neither
   estates, consciences, nor good manners, yet are therefore picked out
   as the necessary men, and whose votes will go furthest; the charges
   of their elections are defrayed, whatever they amount to, tables are
   kept for them at Whitehall, and through Westminster, that they may be
   ready at hand, within call of a question: all of them are received
   into pension, and know their pay-day, which they never fail of:
   insomuch that a great officer was pleased to say, 'That they came
   about him like so many jack-daws for cheese at the end of every
   Session.' If they be not in Parliament, they must be in prison, and
   as they are protected themselves, by privilege, so they sell their
   protections to others, to the obstruction so many years together of
   the law of the land, and the publick justice; for these it is, that
   the long and frequent adjournments are calculated, but all whether
   the court, or the monopolizers of the country party, or those that
   profane the title of old cavaliers, do equally, though upon differing
   reasons, like death apprehend a dissolution. But notwithstanding
   these, there is an handful of salt, a sparkle of soul, that hath
   hitherto preserved this gross body from putrefaction, some gentlemen
   that are constant, invariable, indeed Englishmen; such as are above
   hopes, or fears, or dissimulation, that can neither flatter, nor
   betray their king or country: but being conscious of their own
   loyalty and integrity, proceed throw good and bad report, to acquit
   themselves in their duty to God, their prince, and their nation;
   although so small a scantling in number, that men can scarce reckon
   of them more than a _quorum_; insomuch that it is less difficult to
   conceive how fire was first brought to light in the world than how
   any good thing could ever be produced out of an House of Commons so
   constituted, unless as that is imagined to have come from the rushing
   of trees, or battering of rocks together, by accident, so these, by
   their clashing with one another, have struck out an useful effect
   from so unlikely causes. But whatsoever casual good hath been wrought
   at any time by the assimilation of ambitious, factious and
   disappointed members, to the little, but solid, and unbiassed party,
   the more frequent ill effects, and consequences of so unequal a
   mixture, so long continued, are demonstrable and apparent. For while
   scarce any man comes thither with respect to the publick service, but
   in design to make and raise his fortune, it is not to be expressed,
   the debauchery, and lewdness, which, upon occasion of election to
   Parliaments, are now grown habitual thorow the nation. So that the
   vice, and the expence, are risen to such a prodigious height, that
   few sober men can indure to stand to be chosen on such conditions.
   From whence also arise feuds, and perpetual animosities, over most of
   the counties and corporations, while gentlemen of worth, spirit, and
   ancient estates and dependances, see themselves overpowered in their
   own neighbourhood by the drunkness and bribery, of their competitors.
   But if nevertheless any worthy person chance to carry the election,
   some mercenary or corrupt sheriff makes a double return, and so the
   cause is handed to the Committee of elections, who ask no better, but
   are ready to adopt his adversary into the House if he be not
   legitimate. And if the gentleman agrieved seek his remedy against the
   sheriff in Westminster-Hall, and the proofs be so palpable, that the
   King's Bench cannot invent how to do him injustice, yet the major
   part of the twelve judges shall upon better consideration vacate the
   sheriff's fine and reverse the judgement; but those of them that dare
   dissent from their brethren are in danger to be turned off the bench
   without any cause assigned. While men therefore care not thus how
   they get into the House of Commons, neither can it be expected that
   they should make any conscience of what they do there, but they are
   only intent how to reimburse themselves (if their elections were at
   their own charge) or how to bargain their votes for a place or a
   pension. They list themselves straightways into some Court faction,
   and it is as well-known among them, to what Lord each of them
   retain, as when formerly they wore coats and badges. By this long
   haunting so together, they are grown too so familiar among
   themselves, that all reverence of their own Assembly is lost, that
   they live together not like Parliament men, but like so many good
   fellows met together in a publick house to make merry. And which is
   yet worse, by being so thoroughly acquainted, they understand their
   number and party, so that the use of so publick a counsel is
   frustrated, there is no place for deliberation, no perswading by
   reason, but they can see one another's votes through both throats and
   cravats before they hear them.

   "Where the cards are so well known, they are only fit for a cheat,
   and no fair gamester but would throw them under the table."[209:1]

It is a melancholy picture.

Here, perhaps, may be best inserted the story about the proffered bribe.
The story is entitled to small credit, but as helping to swell and
maintain a tradition concerning an historical character about whom
little is positively known, it can hardly escape mention in any
biography of Marvell. A pamphlet printed in Ireland (1754) supplies an
easy flowing version of the tale.

   "The borough of Hull, in the reign of Charles II., chose Andrew
   Marvell, a young gentleman of little or no fortune, and maintained
   him in London for the service of the public. His understanding,
   integrity, and spirit, were dreadful to the then infamous
   administration. Persuaded that he would be theirs for properly
   asking, they sent his old school-fellow, the Lord Treasurer Danby, to
   renew acquaintance with him in his garret. At parting, the Lord
   Treasurer, out of _pure affection_, slipped into his hand an order
   upon the treasury for £1000, and then went to his chariot. Marvell,
   looking at the paper, calls after the Treasurer, 'My Lord, I request
   another moment.' They went up again to the garret, and Jack, the
   servant boy, was called. 'Jack, child, what had I for dinner
   yesterday?' 'Don't you remember, sir? you had the little shoulder of
   mutton that you ordered me to bring from a woman in the market.'
   'Very right, child.' 'What have I for dinner to-day?' 'Don't you
   know, sir, that you bid me lay by the _blade-bone to broil_.' ''Tis
   so, very right, child, go away.' 'My Lord, do you hear that? Andrew
   Marvell's dinner is provided; there's your piece of paper. I want it
   not. I knew the sort of kindness you intended. I live here to serve
   my constituents: the ministry may seek men for their purpose; _I am
   not one_.'"[210:1]

One more letter remains to be quoted:--


   _To William Ramsden, Esq._
                                                     "_June 10, 1678._

   "DEAR WILL,--I have time to tell you thus much of publick matters.
   The patience of the Scots, under their oppressions, is not to be
   paralleled in any history. They still continue their extraordinary
   and numerous, but peaceable, field conventicles. One Mr. Welch is
   their arch-minister, and the last letter I saw tells, people were
   going forty miles to hear him. There came out, about Christmas last,
   here, a large book concerning the growth of popery and arbitrary
   government. There have been great rewards offered in private, and
   considerable in the Gazette, to any one who could inform of the
   author or printer, but not yet discovered. Three or four printed
   books since have described, as near as it was proper to go, the man
   being a Member of Parliament, Mr. Marvell, to have been the author;
   but if he had, surely he should not have escaped being questioned in
   Parliament or some other place. My good wishes attend you."

The last letter Andrew Marvell wrote to his constituents is dated July
6, 1678. The member for Hull died in August 1678. The Parliament in
which he had sat continuously for eighteen years was at last dissolved
on the 30th of December in the year of his death.


FOOTNOTES:

[181:1] Grosart, vol. iv. p. 248.

[183:1] Ranke's _History of England_, vol. iii. p. 471.

[185:1] Ranke, vol. iii. p. 520.

[187:1] Grosart, vol. iv. (_Growth of Popery_), p. 275.

[187:2] _Ibid._, p. 279.

[189:1] See note to Dr. Airy's edition of Burnet's _History_, vol. ii.
p. 73.

[199:1] Marvell's commendatory verses on "Mr. Milton's Paradise Lost"
(so entitled in the volume of 1681) were first printed in the Second
Edition (1674) of Milton's great poem. Marvell did not agree with Dryden
in thinking that _Paradise Lost_ would be improved by rhyme, and says so
in these verses.

[202:1] Printed in Captain Thompson's edition, vol. i. p. 432.

[204:1] Grosart, vol. iv. p. 304.

[205:1] Grosart, vol. iv. p. 308.

[206:1] Grosart, vol. iv. p. 322.

[209:1] Grosart, vol. iv. p. 327.

[210:1] This story is first told in a balder form by Cooke in his
edition of 1726. It may be read as Cooke tells it in the _Dictionary of
National Biography_, xxxvi., p. 329. There was probably some foundation
for it.




CHAPTER VII

FINAL SATIRES AND DEATH


Marvell was no orator or debater, and though a member of Parliament for
nearly eighteen years, but rarely opened his mouth in the House of
Commons. His old enemy, Samuel Parker, whilst venting his posthumous
spite upon the author of the _Rehearsal Transprosed_, would have us
believe "that our Poet could not speak without a sound basting:
whereupon having frequently undergone this discipline, he learnt at
length to hold his tongue." There is no good reason for believing the
Bishop of Oxford, but it is the fact that, however taught, Marvell had
learnt to hold his tongue. His longest reported speech will be found in
the _Parliamentary History_, vol. iv. p. 855.[211:1] When we remember
how frequently in those days Marvell's pet subjects were under fierce
discussion, we must recognise how fixed was his habit of
self-repression.

On one occasion only are we enabled to catch a glimpse of Marvell
"before the Speaker." It was in March 1677, and is thus reported in the
_Parliamentary History_, though no mention of the incident is made in
the Journals of the House:--

   "_Debate on Mr. Andrew Marvell's striking Sir Philip Harcourt, March
   29._--Mr. Marvell, coming up the house to his place, stumbling at Sir
   Philip Harcourt's foot, in recovering himself, seemed to give Sir
   Philip a box on the ear. The Speaker acquainting the house 'That he
   saw a box on the ear given, and it was his duty to inform the house
   of it,' this debate ensued.

   "Mr. _Marvell_. What passed was through great acquaintance and
   familiarity betwixt us. He neither gave him an affront, nor intended
   him any. But the Speaker cast a severe reflection upon him yesterday,
   when he was out of the house, and he hopes that, as the Speaker keeps
   us in order, he will keep himself in order for the future.

   "Sir _John Ernly_. What the Speaker said yesterday was in Marvell's
   vindication. If these two gentlemen are friends already, he would not
   make them friends, and would let the matter go no further.

   "Sir _Job. Charlton_ is sorry a thing of this nature has happened,
   and no more sense of it. You in the Chair, and a stroke struck!
   Marvell deserves for his reflection on you, Mr. Speaker, to be called
   in question. You cannot do right to the house unless you question it;
   and moves to have Marvell sent to the Tower.

   "The _Speaker_. I saw a blow on one side, and a stroke on the other.

   "Sir _Philip Harcourt_. Marvell had some kind of a stumble, and mine
   was only a thrust; and the thing was accidental.

   "Sir _H. Goodrick_. The persons have declared the thing to be
   accidental, but if done in jest, not fit to be done here. He believes
   it an accident, and hopes the house thinks so too.

   "Mr. Sec. _Williamson_. This does appear, that the action for that
   time was in some heat. He cannot excuse Marvell who made a very
   severe reflection on the Speaker, and since it is so enquired,
   whether you have done your duty, he would have Marvell withdraw, that
   you may consider of it.

   "Col. _Sandys_. Marvell has given you trouble, and instead of
   excusing himself, reflects upon the Speaker: a strange confidence, if
   not an impudence!

   "Mr. _Marvell_. Has so great a respect to the privilege, order, and
   decency, of the house, that he is content to be a sacrifice for it.
   As to the casualty that happened, he saw a seat empty, and going to
   sit in it, his friend put him by, in a jocular manner, and what he
   did was of the same nature. So much familiarity has ever been between
   them, that there was no heat in the thing. He is sorry he gave an
   offence to the house. He seldom speaks to the house, and if he commit
   an error, in the manner of his speech, being not so well tuned, he
   hopes it is not an offence. Whether out or in the house, he has a
   respect to the Speaker. But he has been informed that the Speaker
   resumed something he had said, with reflection. He did not think fit
   to complain of Mr. Seymour to Mr. Speaker. He believes that is not
   reflective. He desires to comport himself with all respect to the
   house. This passage with Harcourt was a perfect casualty, and if you
   think fit, he will withdraw, and sacrifice himself to the censure of
   the house.

   "Sir _Henry Capel_. The blow given Harcourt was with his hat; the
   Speaker cast his eye upon both of them, and both respected him. He
   would not aggravate the thing. Marvell submits, and he would have you
   leave the thing as it is.

   "_Sir Robert Holmes_ saw the whole action. Marvell flung about three
   or four times with his hat, and then gave Harcourt a box on the ear.

   "Sir _Henry Capel_ desires, now that his honour is concerned, that
   Holmes may explain, whether he saw not Marvell with his hat only give
   Harcourt the stroke 'at that time.' Possibly 'at another time' it
   might be.

   "The _Speaker_. Both Holmes and Capel are in the right. But Marvell
   struck Harcourt so home, that his fist, as well as his hat, hit him.

   "Sir _R. Howard_ hopes the house will not have Harcourt say he
   received a blow, when he has not. He thinks what has been said by
   them both sufficient.

   "Mr. _Garraway_ hopes, that by the debate we shall not make the thing
   greater than it is. Would have them both reprimanded for it.

   "Mr. Sec. _Williamson_ submits the honour of the house to the house.
   Would have them made friends, and give that necessary assurance to
   the house, and he, for his part, remains satisfied.

   "Sir _Tho. Meres_. By our long sitting together, we lose, by our
   familiarity and acquaintance, the decencies of the house. He has seen
   500 in the house, and people very orderly; not so much as to read a
   letter, or set up a foot. One could scarce know anybody in the house,
   but him that spoke. He would have the Speaker declare that order
   ought to be kept; but as to that gentleman (Marvell) to rest
   satisfied."

The general impression left upon the mind is that of a friendly-familiar
but choleric gentleman, full of likes and dislikes, readier with his
tongue in the lobby than with "set" speeches in the Chamber. A solitary
politician with a biting pen. Satirists must not complain if they have
enemies.

Marvell's vein of satire was never worked out, and the political poems
of his last decade are fuller than ever of a savage humour. How he kept
his ears is a repeated wonder. He is said to have been on terms of
intimate friendship with Prince Rupert, and it is a steady tradition
that the king was one of his amused readers. It is hard to believe that
even Charles the Second could have seen any humour, good or bad, in such
a couplet:--

    "The poor Priapus King, led by the nose,
    Looks as a thing set up to scare the crows."

Nor can the following verses have been read with much pleasure, either
at Whitehall or in a punt whilst fishing at Windsor. Their occasion was
the setting up in the stocks-market in the City of London of a statue of
the king by Sir Robert Viner, a city knight, to whom Charles was very
heavily in debt. Sir Robert, having a frugal mind, had acquired a statue
of John Sobieski trampling on the Turk, which, judiciously altered, was
made to pass muster so as to represent the Pensioner of Louis the
Fourteenth and the Vendor of Dunkirk trampling on Oliver Cromwell.

    "As cities that to the fierce conqueror yield
    Do at their own charges their citadels build;
    So Sir Robert advanced the King's statue in token
    Of bankers defeated, and Lombard Street broken.

    Some thought it a knightly and generous deed,
    Obliging the city with a King and a steed;
    When with honour he might from his word have gone back;
    He that vows in a calm is absolved by a wrack.

    But now it appears, from the first to the last,
    To be a revenge and a malice forecast;
    Upon the King's birthday to set up a thing
    That shows him a monkey much more than a King.

    When each one that passes finds fault with the horse,
    Yet all do affirm that the King is much worse;
    And some by the likeness Sir Robert suspect
    That he did for the King his own statue erect.

    Thus to see him disfigured--the herb-women chid,
    Who up on their panniers more gracefully rid;
    And so loose in his seat--that all persons agree,
    E'en Sir William Peak[215:1] sits much firmer than he.

    But Sir Robert affirms that we do him much wrong;
    'Tis the 'graver at work, to reform him, so long;
    But, alas! he will never arrive at his end,
    For it is such a King as no chisel can mend.

    But with all his errors restore us our King,
    If ever you hope in December for spring;
    For though all the world cannot show such another,
    Yet we'd rather have him than his bigoted brother."

Of a more exalted vein of satire the following extract may serve as an
example:--

    BRITANNIA AND RALEIGH

    "_Brit._ Ah! Raleigh, when thou didst thy breath resign
             To trembling James, would I had quitted mine.
             Cubs didst thou call them? Hadst thou seen this brood
             Of earls, and dukes, and princes of the blood,
             No more of Scottish race thou would'st complain,
             Those would be blessings in this spurious reign.
             Awake, arise from thy long blessed repose,
             Once more with me partake of mortal woes!

    _Ral._   What mighty power has forced me from my rest?
             Oh! mighty queen, why so untimely dressed?

    _Brit._  Favoured by night, concealed in this disguise,
             Whilst the lewd court in drunken slumber lies,
             I stole away, and never will return,
             Till England knows who did her city burn;
             Till cavaliers shall favourites be deemed,
             And loyal sufferers by the court esteemed;
             Till Leigh and Galloway shall bribes reject;
             Thus Osborne's golden cheat I shall detect:
             Till atheist Lauderdale shall leave this land,
             And Commons' votes shall cut-nose guards disband:
             Till Kate a happy mother shall become,
             Till Charles loves parliaments, and James hates Rome.

    _Ral._   What fatal crimes make you for ever fly
             Your once loved court, and martyr's progeny?

    _Brit._  A colony of French possess the Court,
             Pimps, priests, buffoons, i' the privy-chamber sport.
             Such slimy monsters ne'er approached the throne
             Since Pharaoh's reign, nor so defiled a crown.
             I' the sacred ear tyrannic arts they croak,
             Pervert his mind, his good intentions choke;
             Tell him of golden Indies, fairy lands,
             Leviathan, and absolute commands.
             Thus, fairy-like, the King they steal away,
             And in his room a Lewis changeling lay.
             How oft have I him to himself restored.
             In's left the scale, in 's right hand placed the sword?
             Taught him their use, what dangers would ensue
             To those that tried to separate these two?
             The bloody Scottish chronicle turned o'er,
             Showed him how many kings, in purple gore,
             Were hurled to hell, by learning tyrant lore?
             The other day famed Spenser I did bring,
             In lofty notes Tudor's blest reign to sing;
             How Spain's proud powers her virgin arms controlled,
             And golden days in peaceful order rolled;
             How like ripe fruit she dropped from off her throne,
             Full of grey hairs, good deeds, and great renown.
    ...

    _Ral._   Once more, great queen, thy darling strive to save,
             Snatch him again from scandal and the grave;
             Present to 's thoughts his long-scorned parliament,
             The basis of his throne and government.
             In his deaf ears sound his dead father's name:
             Perhaps that spell may 's erring soul reclaim:
             Who knows what good effects from thence may spring?
             'Tis godlike good to save a falling king.

    _Brit._  Raleigh, no more, for long in vain I've tried
             The Stuart from the tyrant to divide;
             As easily learned virtuosos may
             With the dog's blood his gentle kind convey
             Into the wolf, and make his guardian turn
             To the bleating flock, by him so lately torn:
             If this imperial juice once taint his blood,
             'Tis by no potent antidote withstood.
             Tyrants, like lep'rous kings, for public weal
             Should be immured, lest the contagion steal
             Over the whole. The elect of the Jessean line
             To this firm law their sceptre did resign;
             And shall this base tyrannic brood invade
             Eternal laws, by God for mankind made?

               To the serene Venetian state I'll go,
             From her sage mouth famed principles to know;
             With her the prudence of the ancients read,
             To teach my people in their steps to tread;
             By their great pattern such a state I'll frame,
             Shall eternize a glorious lasting name.
             Till then, my Raleigh, teach our noble youth
             To love sobriety, and holy truth;
             Watch and preside over their tender age,
             Lest court corruption should their souls engage;
             Teach them how arts, and arms, in thy young days,
             Employed our youth--not taverns, stews, and plays;
             Tell them the generous scorn their race does owe
             To flattery, pimping, and a gaudy show;
             Teach them to scorn the Carwells, Portsmouths, Nells,
             The Clevelands, Osbornes, Berties, Lauderdales:
             Poppaea, Tigelline, and Arteria's name,
             All yield to these in lewdness, lust, and fame.
             Make them admire the Talbots, Sydneys, Veres,
             Drake, Cavendish, Blake, men void of slavish fears,
             True sons of glory, pillars of the state,
             On whose famed deeds all tongues and writers wait.
             When with fierce ardour their bright souls do burn,
             Back to my dearest country I'll return."

The dialogue between the two horses, which bore upon their respective
backs the stone effigies of Charles the First at Charing Cross and
Charles the Second at Wool-Church, is, in its own rough way, masterly
satire for the popular ear.

             "If the Roman Church, good Christians, oblige ye
             To believe man and beast have spoken in effigy,
             Why should we not credit the public discourses,
             In a dialogue between two inanimate horses?
             The horses I mean of Wool-Church and Charing,
             Who told many truths worth any man's hearing,
             Since Viner and Osborn did buy and provide 'em
             For the two mighty monarchs who now do bestride 'em.
             The stately brass stallion, and the white marble steed,
             The night came together, by all 'tis agreed;
             When both kings were weary of sitting all day,
             They stole off, incognito, each his own way;
             And then the two jades, after mutual salutes,
             Not only discoursed, but fell to disputes."

The dialogue is too long to be quoted. Charles the Second's steed
boldly declares:--

    "De Witt and Cromwell had each a brave soul,
    I freely declare it, I am for old Noll;
    Though his government did a tyrant resemble,
    He made England great, and his enemies tremble."

Mr. Hollis, when he sent the picture of Cromwell by Cooper to Sidney
Sussex College, is said to have written beneath it the lines just
quoted.

The satire ends thus:--

   "_Charing Cross._ But canst them devise when things will be mended?

   _Wool-Church._    When the reign of the line of the Stuarts is ended.

   _Charing Cross._  Then England, rejoice, thy redemption draws nigh;
                     Thy oppression together with kingship shall die.

   _Chorus._  A Commonwealth, a Commonwealth we proclaim to the nation,
              For the gods have repented the King's restoration."

These probably are the lines which spread the popular, but mistaken,
belief that Marvell was a Republican.

Andrew Marvell died in his lodgings in London on the 16th of August
1678. Colonel Grosvenor, writing to George Treby, M.P. (afterwards Chief
of the Common Pleas), on the 17th of August, reports "Andrew Marvell
died yesterday of apoplexy." Parliament was not sitting at the time.
What was said of the elder Andrew may also be said of the younger: he
was happy in the moment of his death. The one just escaped the Civil
War, the other the Popish Plot.

Marvell was thought to have been poisoned. Such a suspicion in those bad
times was not far-fetched. His satires, rough but moving, had been
widely read, and his fears for the Constitution, his dread of

    "The grim Monster, Arbitrary Power,
    The ugliest Giant ever trod the earth,"

infested many breasts, and bred terror.

    "Marvell, the Island's watchful sentinel,
    Stood in the gap and bravely kept his post."

The post was one of obvious danger, and

    "Whether Fate or Art untwin'd his thread
    Remains in doubt."[220:1]

The doubt has now been dissipated by the research of an accomplished
physician, Dr. Gee, who in 1874 communicated to the _Athenæum_ (March 7,
1874) an extract from Richard Morton's {Greek: Pyretologia} (1692),
containing a full account of Marvell's sickness and death. Art "untwin'd
his thread," but it was the doctor's art. Dr. Gee's translation of
Morton's medical Latin is as follows:--

   "In this manner was that most famous man Andrew Marvell carried off
   from amongst the living before his time, to the great loss of the
   republic, and especially the republic of letters; through the
   ignorance of an old conceited doctor, who was in the habit on all
   occasions of raving excessively against Peruvian bark, as if it were
   a common plague. Howbeit, without any clear indication, in the
   interval after a third fit of regular tertian ague, and by way of
   preparation (so that all things might seem to be done most
   methodically), blood was copiously drawn from the patient, who was
   advanced in years." [Here follow more details of treatment, which I
   pass over.] "The way having been made ready after this fashion, at
   the beginning of the next fit, a great febrifuge was given, a
   draught, that is to say, of Venice treacle, etc. By the doctor's
   orders, the patient was covered up close with blankets, say rather,
   was buried under them; and composed himself to sleep and sweat, so
   that he might escape the cold shivers which are wont to accompany the
   onset of the ague-fit. He was seized with the deepest sleep and
   colliquative sweats, and in the short space of twenty-four hours from
   the time of the ague-fit, he died comatose. He died, who, had a
   single ounce of Peruvian bark been properly given, might easily have
   escaped, in twenty-four hours, from the jaws of the grave and the
   disease: and so burning with anger, I informed the doctor, when he
   told me this story without any sense of shame."

Marvell was buried on the 18th of August, "under the pews in the south
side of St. Giles's Church in the Fields, under the window wherein is
painted on glass a red lion." So writes the invaluable Aubrey, who tells
us he had the account from the sexton who made the grave.

In 1678 St. Giles's Church was a brick structure built by Laud. The
present imposing church was built on the site of the old one in 1730-34.

In 1774 Captain Thompson, so he tells us, "visited the grand mausoleum
under the church of St. Giles, to search for the coffin in which Mr.
Marvell was placed: in this vault were deposited upwards of a thousand
bodies, but I could find no plate of an earlier date than 1722; I do
therefore suppose the new church is built upon the former burial place."

The poet's grand-nephew, Mr. Robert Nettleton, in 1764 placed on the
north side of the present church, upon a black marble slab, a long
epitaph, still to be seen, recording the fact that "near to this place
lyeth the body of Andrew Marvell, Esquire." At no great distance from
this slab is the tombstone, recently brought in from the graveyard
outside, of _Georgius Chapman, Poeta_, a fine Roman monument, prepared
by the care and at the cost of the poet's friend, Inigo Jones. Still
left exposed, in what is now a doleful garden (not at all Marvellian),
is the tombstone of Richard Penderel of Boscobel, one of the five yeomen
brothers who helped Charles to escape after Worcester. Lord Herbert of
Cherbury, in 1648, and Shirley the dramatist, in 1666, had been carried
to the same place of sepulture.

Aubrey describes Marvell "as of middling stature, pretty strong-set,
roundish faced, cherry-cheeked, hazell eye, brown hair. He was, in his
conversation, very modest, and of very few words. Though he loved wine,
he would never drink hard in company, and was wont to say that he would
not play the good fellow in any man's company in whose hands he would
not trust his life. He kept bottles of wine at his lodgings, and many
times he would drink liberally by himself and to refresh his spirit and
exalt his muse. James Harrington (author of _Oceana_) was his intimate
friend; J. Pell, D.D., was one of his acquaintances. He had not a
general acquaintance."

Dr. Pell, one may remark, was a great friend of Hobbes.

In March 1679 joint administration was granted by the Prerogative Court
of Canterbury, _Mariæ Marvell relictæ et Johni Greni Creditori_. This is
the first time we hear of there being any wife in the case. A creditor
of a deceased person could not obtain administration without citing the
next of kin, but a widow was entitled, under a statute of Henry
VIII., as of right, to administration, and it may be that Mr.
Green thought the quickest way of being paid his debt was to invent a
widow. The practice of the court required an affidavit from the widow
deposing that she was the lawful relict of the deceased, but this
assertion on oath seems in ordinary cases to have been sufficient, if
the customary fees were forthcoming. Captain Thompson roundly asserts
that the alleged Mary Marvell was a cheat, and no more than the
lodging-house keeper where he had last lived--and Marvell was a
migratory man.[223:1] Mary Marvell's name appears once again, in the
forefront of the first edition of Marvell's _Poems_ (1681), where she
certifies all the contents to be her husband's works. This may have been
a publisher's, as the affidavit may have been a creditor's, artifice. As
against this, Mr. Grosart, who believed in Mary Marvell, reminds us that
Mr. Robert Boulter, the publisher of the poems, was a most respectable
man, and a friend both of Milton's and Marvell's, and not at all likely
either to cheat the public with a falsely signed certificate, or to be
cheated by a London lodging-house keeper. Whatever "Mary Marvell" may
have been, "widow, wife, or maid," she is heard of no more.

Hull was not wholly unmindful of her late and (William Wilberforce
notwithstanding) her most famous member. "On Thursday the 26th of
September 1678, in consideration of the kindness the Town and Borough
had for Andrew Marvell, Esq., one of the Burgesses of Parliament for the
same Borough (lately deceased), and for his great merits from the
Corporation. It is this day ordered by the Court that Fifty pounds be
paid out of the Town's Chest towards the discharge of his funerals
(_sic_), and to perpetuate his memory by a gravestone" (_Bench Books of
Hull_).

The incumbent of Trinity Church is said to have objected to the erection
of any monument. At all events there is none. Marvell had many enemies
in the Church. Sharp, afterwards Archbishop of York, was a Yorkshire
man, and had been domestic chaplain to Sir Heneage Finch, a
lawyer-member, much lashed by Marvell's bitter pen. Sharp had also taken
part in the quarrel with the Dissenters, and is reported to have been
very much opposed to any Hull monument to Marvell. Captain Thompson says
"the Epitaph which the Town of Hull caused to be erected to Marvell's
memory was torn down by the Zealots of the King's party." There is no
record of this occurrence.

There are several portraits of Marvell in existence--one now being in
the National Portrait Gallery. A modern statue in marble adorns the Town
Hall of Hull.


FOOTNOTES:

[211:1] In reading the early volumes of the _Parliamentary History_ the
question has to be asked, What authority is there for the reports of
speeches? In Charles the Second's time some of the speakers, both in the
Lords and Commons, evidently communicated their orations to the press.

[215:1] Lord Mayor, 1667.

[220:1] See _Marvell's Ghost_, in _Poems on Affairs of State_.

[223:1] The cottage at Highgate, long called 'Marvell's Cottage,' has
now disappeared. Several of Marvell's letters were written from
Highgate.




CHAPTER VIII

WORK AS A MAN OF LETTERS


Marvell's work as a man of letters easily divides itself into the
inevitable three parts. _First_, as a poet properly so called; _Second_,
as a political satirist using rhyme; and _Third_, as a writer of prose.

Upon Marvell's work as a poet properly so called that curious, floating,
ever-changing population to whom it is convenient to refer as "the
reading public," had no opportunity of forming any real opinion until
after the poet's death, namely, when the small folio of 1681 made its
appearance. This volume, although not containing the _Horatian Ode upon
Cromwell's Return from Ireland_ or the lines upon Cromwell's death, did
contain, saving these exceptions, all the best of Marvell's verse.

How this poetry was received, to whom and to how many it gave pleasure,
we have not the means of knowing. The book, like all other good books,
had to take its chance. Good poetry is never exactly unpopular--its
difficulty is to get a hearing, to secure a _vogue_. I feel certain that
from 1681 onwards many ingenuous souls read _Eyes and Tears_, _The
Bermudas_, _The Nymph complaining for the Death of her Fawn_, _To his
Coy Mistress_, _Young Love_, and _The Garden_ with pure delight. In 1699
the poet Pomfret, of whose _Choice_ Dr. Johnson said in 1780, "perhaps
no composition in our language has been oftener perused," and who
Southey in 1807 declared to be "the most popular of English poets"; in
1699, I say, this poet Pomfret says in a preface, sensibly enough, "to
please everyone would be a New Thing, and to write so as to please no
Body would be as New, for even Quarles and Wythers (_sic_) have their
Admirers." So liable is the public taste to fluctuations and reversals,
that to-day, though Quarles and Wither are not popular authors, they
certainly number many more readers than Pomfret, Southey's "most popular
of English poets," who has now, it is to be feared, finally disappeared
even from the Anthologies. But if Quarles and Wither had their admirers
even in 1699, the poet Marvell, we may be sure, had his also.

Marvell had many poetical contemporaries--five-and-twenty at
least--poets of mark and interest, to most of whom, as well as to some
of his immediate predecessors, he stood, as I must suppose, in some
degree of poetical relationship. With Milton and Dryden no comparison
will suggest itself, but with Donne and Cowley, with Waller and Denham,
with Butler and the now wellnigh forgotten Cleveland, with Walker and
Charles Cotton, with Rochester and Dorset, some resemblances, certain
influences, may be found and traced. From the order of his mind and his
prose style, I should judge Marvell to have been both a reader and a
critic of his contemporaries in verse and prose--though of his
criticisms little remains. Of Butler he twice speaks with great respect,
and his sole reference to the dead Cleveland is kindly. Of Milton we
know what he thought, whilst Aubrey tells us that he once heard Marvell
say that the Earl of Rochester was the only man in England that had the
true vein of satire.

Be these influences what they may or must have been, to us Marvell
occupies, as a poet, a niche by himself. A finished master of his art he
never was. He could not write verses like his friend Lovelace, or like
Cowley's _Chronicle_ or Waller's lines "On a Girdle." He had not the
inexhaustible, astonishing (though tiresome) wit of Butler. He is often
clumsy and sometimes almost babyish. One has frequently occasion to
wonder how a man of business could allow himself to be tickled by such
obvious straws as are too many of the conceits which give him pleasure.
To attribute all the conceits of this period to the influence of Dr.
Donne is but a poor excuse after all. The worst thing that can be said
against poetry is that there is so much tedium in it. The glorious
moments are all too few. It is his honest recognition of this woeful
fact that makes Dr. Johnson, with all his faults lying thick about him,
the most consolatory of our critics to the ordinary reading man.
"Tediousness is the most fatal of all faults.... Unhappily this
pernicious failure is that which an author is least able to discover. We
are seldom tiresome to ourselves.... Perhaps no man ever thought a line
superfluous when he wrote it" (_Lives of the Poets_. Under _Prior_--see
also under _Butler_).

That Marvell is never tiresome I will not assert. But he too has his
glorious moments, and they are all his own. In the whole compass of our
poetry there is nothing quite like Marvell's love of gardens and woods,
of meads and rivers and birds. It is a love not learnt from books, not
borrowed from brother-poets. It is not indulged in to prove anything. It
is all sheer enjoyment.

    "Bind me, ye woodbines, in your twines,
    Curb me about, ye gadding vines,
    And oh, so close your circles lace,
    That I may never leave this place!
    But, lest your fetters prove too weak,
    Ere I your silken bondage break,
    Do you, O brambles, chain me too,
    And, courteous briars, nail me through.
    ...
    Here at the fountain's sliding foot,
    Or at some fruit-tree's mossy root,
    Casting the body's vest aside,
    My soul into the boughs does glide;
    There, like a bird, it sits and sings."

No poet is happier than Marvell in creating the impression that he made
his verses out of doors.

    "He saw the partridge drum in the woods;
    He heard the woodcock's evening hymn;
    He found the tawny thrush's broods,
    And the shy hawk did wait for him.
    What others did at distance hear
    And guessed within the thicket's gloom
    Was shown to this philosopher,
    And at his bidding seemed to come."

                    (From Emerson's _Wood Notes_.)

Marvell's immediate fame as a true poet was, I dare say, obscured for a
good while both by its original note (for originality is always
forbidding at first sight) and by its author's fame as a satirist, and
his reputation as a lover of "liberty's glorious feast." It was as one
of the poets encountered in the _Poems on Affairs of State_ (fifth
edition, 1703) that Marvell was best known during the greater part of
the eighteenth century. As Milton's friend Marvell had, as it were, a
side-chapel in the great Miltonic temple. The patriotic member of
Parliament, who refused in his poverty the Lord-Treasurer Danby's
proffered bribe, became a character in history before the exquisite
quality of his garden-poetry was recognised. There was a cult for
Liberty in the middle of the eighteenth century, and Marvell's name was
on the list of its professors. Wordsworth's sonnet has preserved this
tradition for us.

    "Great men have been among us; hands that penn'd
    And tongues that utter'd wisdom, better none:
    The later Sydney, Marvell, Harrington."

In 1726 Thomas Cooke printed an edition of Marvell's works which
contains the poetry that was in the folio of 1681, and in 1772 Cooke's
edition was reprinted by T. Davies. It was probably Davies's edition
that Charles Lamb, writing to Godwin on Sunday, 14th December 1800, says
he "was just going to possess": a notable addition to Lamb's library,
and an event in the history of the progress of Marvell's poetical
reputation. Captain Thompson's edition, containing the _Horatian Ode_
and other pieces, followed in 1776. In the great Poetical Collection of
the Booksellers (1779-1781) which they improperly[229:1] called
"Johnson's _Poets_" (improperly, because the poets were, with four
exceptions, the choice not of the biographer but of the booksellers,
anxious to retain their imaginary copyright), Marvell has no place. Mr.
George Ellis, in his _Specimens_ of the early English poets first
published in 1803, printed from Marvell _Daphne and Chloe_ (in part) and
_Young Love_. When Mr. Bowles, that once famous sonneteer, edited Pope
in 1806, he, by way of belittling Pope, quoted two lines from Marvell,
now well known, but unfamiliar in 1806:--

    "And through the hazels thick espy
    The hatching throstle's shining eye."

He remarked upon them, "the last circumstance is new, highly poetical,
and could only have been described by one who was a real lover of
nature and a witness of her beauties in her most solitary retirement."
On this Mark Pattison makes the comment that the lines only prove that
Marvell when a boy went bird-nesting (_Essays_, vol. ii. p. 374), a
pursuit denied to Pope by his manifold infirmities. The poet Campbell,
in his _Specimens_ (1819), gave an excellent sketch of Marvell's life,
and selected _The Bermudas_, _The Nymph and Fawn_, and _Young Love_.
Then came, fresh from talk with Charles Lamb, Hazlitt, with his _Select
Poets_ (1825), which contains the _Horatian Ode_, _Bermudas_, _To his
Coy Mistress_, _The Nymph and Fawn_, _A Drop of Dew_, _The Garden_, _The
Gallery_, _Upon the Hill and Grove at Billborow_. In this choice we may
see the hand of Charles Lamb, as Tennyson's may be noticed in the
selection made in Palgrave's _Golden Treasury_ (1863). Dean Trench in
his _Household Book of English Poetry_ (1869) gives _Eyes and Tears_,
the _Horatian Ode_, and _A Drop of Dew_. In Mr. Ward's _English Poets_
(1880) Marvell is represented by _The Garden_, _A Drop of Dew_, _The
Bermudas_, _Young Love_, the _Horatian Ode_, and the _Lines on Paradise
Lost_. Thanks to these later Anthologies and to the quotations from _The
Garden_ and _Upon Appleton House_ in the _Essays of Elia_, Marvell's
fame as a true poet has of recent years become widespread, and is now,
whatever vicissitudes it may have endured, well established.

As a satirist in rhyme Marvell has shared the usual and not undeserved
fate of almost all satirists of their age and fellow-men. The authors of
lines written in heat to give expression to the anger of the hour may
well be content if their effusions give the pain or teach the lesson
they were intended to give or teach. If you lash the age, you do so
presumably for the benefit of the age. It is very hard to transmit even
a fierce and genuine indignation from one age to another. Marvell's
satires were too hastily composed, too roughly constructed, too redolent
of the occasion, to enter into the kingdom of poetry. To the careful and
character-loving reader of history, particularly if he chance to have a
feeling for the House of Commons, not merely as an institution, but as a
place of resort, Marvell's satirical poems must always be intensely
interesting. They strike me as honest in their main intention, and never
very wide of the mark. Hallam says, in his lofty way, "We read with
nothing but disgust the satirical poetry of Cleveland, Butler, Oldham,
Marvell," and he adds, "Marvell's satires are gross and stupid."[231:1]
Gross they certainly occasionally are, but stupid they never are.
Marvell was far too well-informed a politician and too shrewd a man ever
to be stupid.

As a satirist Marvell had, if he wanted them, many models of style, but
he really needed none, for he just wrote down in rough-and-ready rhyme
whatever his head or his spleen suggested to his fancy. Every now and
again there is a noble outburst of feeling, and a couplet of great
felicity. I confess to taking great pleasure in Marvell's satires.

As a prose writer Marvell has many merits and one great fault. He has
fire and fancy and was the owner and master of a precise vocabulary well
fitted to clothe and set forth a well-reasoned and lofty argument. He
knew how to be both terse and diffuse, and can compress himself into a
line or expand over a paragraph. He has touches of a grave irony as well
as of a boisterous humour. He can tell an anecdote and elaborate a
parable. Swift, we know, had not only Butler's _Hudibras_ by heart, but
was also (we may be sure) a close student of Marvell's prose. His great
fault is a very common one. He is too long. He forgets how quickly a
reader grows tired. He is so interested in the evolutions of his own
mind that he forgets his audience. His interest at times seems as if it
were going to prove endless. It is the first business of an author to
arrest and then to retain the attention of the reader. To do this
requires great artifice.

Among the masters of English prose it would be rash to rank Marvell, who
was neither a Hooker nor a Taylor. None the less he was the owner of a
prose style which some people think the best prose style of all--that of
honest men who have something to say.

FOOTNOTES:

[229:1] "Indecently" is the doctor's own expression.

[231:1] See Hallam's _History of Literature_, vol. iv. pp. 433, 439.




INDEX


A

"_Account of the Growth of Popery and Arbitrary Government in England_,"
180-1, 187;
  quoted, 188.

Act of Uniformity, 143, 184.

Addison, 65.

Aitken, Mr., 47.

Amersham, 145.

Amsterdam, 59, 197.

Angier, Lord, 196.

_Appleton House_, 66.

Arlington, 185, 186.

_Ars Poetica_, 47.

Ashley, Lord, 120, 150, 185.

_Athenæ Oxonienses_, 10.

Aubrey, 222.

Austin, John, 159.

_Autobiography_ (Clarendon), 136.

_Autobiography of Matthew Robinson_, 11 _n._

Axtell, Lieut.-Colonel, 28, 29.


B

_Baker's Chronicle_, 80.

Baker, Thomas, 24.

Bampfield, Thomas, 80.

Banda Islands, 127.

Barbadoes, 58.

Barnard, Edward, 95.

Barron, Richard, 64.

Baxter, Richard, 52, 93, 179.

Bedford, 162.

Bench Books of Hull, 223.

Bennet, Sir John, 195.

Berkeley, Charles, 115.

Berkenhead, Sir John, 191.

_Bermudas, The_, 66, 225, 230.

Besant, Sir Walter, 118 _n._

Bill for "the Rebuilding of London," 123, 124, 125, 126 _n._;
  amended, 148.

Bill of Conventicles, 142, 146, 147, 148.

Bill of Subsidy, 193.

Bill of Test, 205.

Bill of Uniformity, 101.

"_Bind me, ye woodbines_," 227.

Blackheath, 188.

Blake, Admiral, 59, 69, 71, 75.

Blaydes, James, 6.

---- Joseph, 6.

_Blenheim_ (Addison), 70.

Blood, Colonel, 196.

Bodleian Library, 31, 116.

Boulter, Robert, 223.

Bowles, 229.

Bowyer, 64.

Boyle, Richard, 115.

Bradshaw, John, Lord-President of the Council, 28, 48, 52, 94, 95.

Braganza, Catherine of, 33.

_Bramhall Preface_, 162.

Breda, 88;
  Declaration, 102, 127, 136.

"_Britannia and Raleigh_," 216 _seq._

Brunswick, Duke of, 196.

Buckingham, Duke of, 150, 185, 196, 205, 206.

Bucknoll, Sir William, 195.

Bunyan, 162.

Burnet, Bishop, 3, 163.

Butler, 62 _n._, 154, 226.


C

"Cabal," 184.

Cadsand, 186.

Calamy, Edmund, 93, 94.

Cambridge, 48, 175.

Canary Islands, 70.

Canterbury, Prerogative Court of, 222.

Capel, 172.

Carey, Henry, 126 _n._

Carlisle, Lady, 113.

---- Lord, 101, 108, 113.

Carteret, Sir George (Treasurer of Navy), 120, 141, 143.

Castlemaine, Lady, 134.

_Character of Holland, The_, 60.

Charles I., 29, 167.

Charles II., 76, 80, 81, 90, 93, 95, 127, 182, 184, 185, 186, 188, 189,
195, 196, 203, 205, 206, 214, 222.

Chateaubriand, 24.

Chatham, 128.

Cherry Burton, 6.

_Choice_ (Pomfret), 225.

_Chronicle_ (Cowley), 227.

Chute, Chaloner, 80.

Civil War, 23, 219.

Clare, Lord, 193, 195.

Clarendon, Earl of, 28, 52, 77, 82;
  _History_, 88, 114, 120;
  _Life_, 129, 134, 135, 136, 138, 148 _n._

Cleveland, Duke of, 226.

---- Duchess of, 196.

Clifford, 154, 185, 186.

Clifford's Inn, 125.

Cole, William, 5.

_Collection of Poems on Affairs of State_, 35.

_Complete Works in Verse and Prose of Andrew Marvell, M.P., The_, 8.

Conventicle Act, 144.

Convention Parliament, 87, 91, 95.

Cooke, Thomas, 229.

Cooper, 219.

Copenhagen, 113.

Cosin, Dr., Bishop of Durham, 94, 148.

Cotton, Charles, 226.

Council of Trent, 178.

Court of Chancery, 125.

Coventry, Sir John, 191.

Cowley, 226.

Crew, Bishop of Durham, 202.

_Critic_ (Sheridan), 154.

Cromwell, Oliver, 24, 25, 28, 29, 30, 59, 60, 63, 64, 68, 73, 75, 77,
89, 92, 93, 94, 95, 127, 137, 140, 145, 215, 219.

---- Lord Richard, 77, 79, 80, 81.

---- the Lady Mary, 71.


D

Danby, Lord-Treasurer, 209, 228.

_Daphne and Chloe_, 229.

Dartmouth, Lord (Colonel Legge), 141 _n._

Davies, T., 229.

"_Debate on Mr. Andrew Marvell's striking Sir Philip Harcourt,
March 29_," etc., 212.

Declaration of Indulgence, 187, 188.

Declaration of War, The, 187.

_Defence and Continuation of Ecclesiastical Politie, A_ (Parker), 153.

_Defensio Secunda pro populo Anglicano_ (Milton), 48.

Denham, Sir John, 27, 129, 226.

De Ruyter, 115, 128, 136.

"_Description of Holland, A_" (Butler), 62.

De Witt, John, 63, 187, 197.

_Dialogue between two horses, Charles I. at Charing Cross, and
Charles II. at Wool Church_, 218, 219.

_Dictionary of National Biography_, 9, 210 _n._

_Directions to a Painter_ (Denham), 129.

Directory of Public Worship, 90, 103.

_Discourse by Way of Vision concerning the Government of Oliver
Cromwell_ (quoted), 73, 92.

_Discourse concerning Government_ (Sidney), 64.

"_Discourse of Ecclesiastical Politie wherein the Authority of the
Civil Magistrate over the Consciences of Subjects in matters of
external Religion is asserted_," etc., 153.

Donne, Dr., 226, 227.

_Don Quixote_ (Shelton's translation), 78.

Dorset, 226.

Dort, 187.

Dover, 90.

_Drama Commonplaces_, 154.

_Drop of Dew, A_, 230.

Dryden, John, 20, 24, 27, 69, 130.

Dublin Castle, 196.

_Dunciad_, 21.

Dunkirk, 127, 137, 193, 215.

Dutch War, 126.

Dutton, Mr. (Cromwell's ward), 54.


E

East India Company, 127.

_Ecclesiastical Politie_ (quoted), 157-8, 159-60.

Edgar, Prince, 196.

Elizabeth (Queen), 143.

"Employment of my Solitude, The" (Fairfax), 32.

"England's Way to Win Wealth," 56;
  quoted, 56, 57, 58.

Erith, 139.

_Essays of Elia_, 230.

Eton College, 51.

Evelyn, John, 19, 121, 138, 139 _n._

_Eyes and Tears_, 225, 230.


F

Fagg, Sir John, 205.

Fairfax, Lady Mary, 27, 28, 32, 63.

---- Lord, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 48, 50, 63.

---- Sir William, 33, 36.

Fanshaw, Sir Richard, 49 _n._

Fauconberg, Lady, 95.

---- Viscount (afterwards Earl), 71.

Finch, Sir Heneage, 91, 224.

_First Anniversary of the Government under His Highness the
Lord-Protector, The_, 60.

Five Mile Act, 117, 162, 203.

_Flagellum Parliamentum_, 97.

Flanders, 196.

Flecknoe, Richard, 20, 21.

France, 183, 184, 197, 204.

"_Free Impartial Censure of the Platonick Philosophy, A_"
(Parker), 152 _n._, 174.

French Alliance, 188.


G

_Gallery, The_, 230.

"Garden Poetry," 75.

_Garden, The_, 66, 225.

Gee, Dr., 220.

Gilbey. Colonel, 95, 98, 101.

Gillingham, 127.

Gladstone, 23, 104 _n._

_Golden Remains_ (Hales), 51.

_Golden Treasury_ (1863), (Palgrave), 230.

Gombroon, 194.

_Government of the People of England_, etc. (Parker), 172.

Green, Mr., 222.

Grosart, Mr., 7, 65, 84, 85, 106, 165-9 _n._, 176 _n._, 178 _n._,
181 _n._, 187 _n._, 204-6 _n._, 209 _n._, 223.

Grosvenor, Colonel, 219.

_Growth of Popery_ (quoted), 203, 206.


H

Hague, The, 197.

Hale, Sir Matthew, 92, 125.

Hales, John, 51.

Hallam, 231.

Hamilton, 172.

Harding, Dean, 118.

Harrington, James, 76, 222.

Harrison, 29, 30.

Harwich, 115.

Hastings, Lord Henry, 27.

Hazlitt, 61, 239.

Herrick, 27.

_His Majesty's most Gracious Speech to Both Houses of Parliament_, 200.

_Historical Dictionary_ (Jeremy Collier), 24 _n._

_History of England_ (Ranke), 59, 183, 185 _n._

_History of His Own Time_ (Burnet), 129, 136, 152 _n._, 189 _n._

_History of His Own Time_ (Parker), 96 _n._, 170 _n._

_History of Literature_ (Hallam), 231 _n._

_History of the Rebellion and Civil Wars in England, The_, 136.

Hobbes, 11, 12, 156, 157.

Holland, 120, 135, 182-4, 186, 197.

---- Lord, 172.

Hollis, Thomas, 64, 219.

_Holy Dying_, 151.

_Horatian Ode upon Cromwell's Return from Ireland_, 63, 66, 225, 229, 230.

_Hortus_ (quoted), 45-6.

_Household Book of English Poetry_ (1809) (Dean Trench), 230.

Houses of Convocation, 101.

Howard, Sir Robert, 195.

_Hudibras_ (Butler), 231.

Hull, 2, 5, 8, 17, 18, 50, 59, 84, 95, 98, 99, 101, 209, 223, 224;
  Town Hall, 224.

_Hull, History of_ (Gent), 17.

Humber, The, 99.

Hyde, Mrs., 202.

---- Sir Edward (Earl of Clarendon), 49 _n._


I

Imposition upon wines, 196.

Indies, East and West, 93.

Inigo Jones, 221-2.

_Insolence and Impudence Triumphant_, 153.

Ireland, 122, 196, 209.

Irish Cattle Bill, 122.


J

Jessopp, Mr., 120.

Johnson, Dr., 225, 227.

"Johnson's _Poets_," 229.


K

Kremlin, 108.


L

Lamb, William, 20, 61.

Lambert, General, 29, 31, 82.

Lambeth, 175.

_Last Instructions to a Painter about the Dutch Wars, The_, 129;
  quoted, 130 _seq._, 135.

Laud, Archbishop, 91, 167, 221.

Lauderdale, Lord, 150, 185, 201, 202.

Lawson, Admiral, 115.

Lenthall, Speaker, 81, 83.

"Letter from a Parliament Man to his Friend" (Shaftesbury), 97.

_Leviathan_ (Hobbes), 156.

_Life of the Great Lord Fairfax_ (Markham) (quoted), 31.

_Lines on Paradise Lost_, 230.

Locke, John, 6, 179.

London, 90;
  Great Fire of, 17, 119, 209;
  Great Plague of, 115, 116, 119.

Lort, Dr. (Master of Trinity), 10.

Louis XIV., 183, 185, 186, 188, 189, 193, 196, 215.

Lovelace, Richard, 25, 26, 227.

_Lucasta_, 25, 26.


M

Macaulay, 70, 92.

"MacFlecknoe" (quoted), 21.

Manton, Dr., 162.

_Mariæ Marvell relictæ et Johni Greni Creditori_, 222.

Marlborough, Earl of, 115.

Martin Marprelate, 24.

Marvell, Andrew, born 1621, 4;
  ancestry, 4-5;
  Hull Grammar School, 8;
  school days, 8-9;
  goes to Trinity College, Cambridge, 10;
  life at Cambridge, 11-12;
  becomes a Roman Catholic, 12;
  recantation and return to Trinity, 14;
  life at Cambridge ends, 17;
  death of mother, 17;
  abroad in France, Spain, Holland, and Italy, 19;
  acquainted with French, Dutch, and Spanish languages, 19;
  poet, parliamentarian, and controversialist, 20;
  in Rome (1645), 20;
  invites Flecknoe to dinner, 22;
  neither a Republican nor a Puritan, 23;
  a Protestant and a member of the Reformed Church of England, 23;
  stood for both King and Parliament, 23;
  considered by Collier a dissenter, 24 _n._;
  civil servant during Commonwealth, 24;
  rejoices at Restoration, 25;
  keeps Royalist company (1646-50), 25;
  contributes commendatory lines to Richard Lovelace in poems published
    1649, 25;
  defends Lovelace, 26;
  loved to be alone with his friends, lived for the most part in a hired
    lodging, 26;
  one of thirty-three poets who wept for the early death of Lord H.
    Hastings, 27;
  went to live with Lord Fairfax at Nunappleton House as tutor to only
    child and daughter of the house (1650), 27;
  anonymity of verses, 34;
  small volume containing "The Garden Poetry" (1681), 34;
  tells story of Nunappleton House, 36-45;
  applies to Secretary for Foreign Tongues for a testimonial, 48;
  recommended by Milton to Bradshaw for post of Latin Secretary, 50;
  appointed four years later, 51:
  frequently visits Eton, 51;
  Milton intrusts him with a letter and copy of _Secunda defensio_ to
    Bradshaw, 52;
  appointed by the Lord-Protector tutor to Mr. Dutton, 54;
  resides with Oxenbridges, 54;
  letters, 53, 54-5, 85-7, 92-3, 94-6, 99, 100-1, 104, 105, 109-12, 121,
    122, 140, 141-3, 145-7, 148-50, 189-91, 191 _seq._, 210;
  begins his career as anonymous political poet and satirist (1653), 56;
  dislike of the Dutch, 56;
  impregnated with the new ideas about sea power, 59;
  reported to have been among crowd which witnessed Charles I.'s death, 64;
  first collected edition of works, verse and prose, produced by
    subscription in three volumes, 64;
  became Milton's assistant (1657), 68;
  friendship with Milton, 69;
  takes Milton's place in receptions at foreign embassies, 69;
  plays part of Laureate during Protector's life, 71;
  produces two songs on marriage of Lady Mary Cromwell, 72-3;
  attends Cromwell's funeral, 73;
  is keenly interested in public affairs, 75;
  becomes a civil servant for a year, 75;
  M.P. for Hull, 75;
  friend of Milton and Harrington, 76;
  well disposed towards Charles II., 77;
  remains in office till end of year (1659), 77;
  elected with Ramsden M.P. for Kingston-upon-Hull, 78;
  attended opening of Parliament (1659), 80;
  is not a "Rumper," 84;
  again elected for Hull (1660), 84;
  begins his remarkable correspondence with the Corporation of Hull, 84;
  a satirist, not an enthusiast, 85;
  lines on Restoration, 90;
  complains to House of exaction of £150 for release of Milton, 91;
  elected for third, and last, time member for Hull, 95;
  receives fee from Corporation of Hull for attendance at House, 96;
  reviled by Parker for taking this payment, 96;
  _Flagellum Parliamentum_ attributed to, 97;
  goes to Holland, 100;
  is recalled, 101;
  while in Holland writes to Trinity House and to the Corporation of Hull
    on business matters, 101;
  goes as secretary to Lord Carlisle on an embassy to Sweden and
    Denmark, 106;
  public entry into Moscow, 108;
  assists at formal reception of Lord Carlisle as English ambassador, 109;
  renders oration to Czar into Latin, 109;
  Russians object to terms of oration, 109;
  replies, 109-12;
  returns from  embassy, 113;
  reaches London, 113;
  attends Parliament at Oxford, 116;
  _The Last Instructions to a Painter about the Dutch Wars_, 129-35;
  bitter enemy of Hyde, 136;
  lines upon Clarendon House, 138;
  inquires into "miscarriages of the late war," 139;
  _The Rehearsal Transprosed_, 151;
  its great success, 152;
  literary method described by Parker, 162;
  called "a droll," "a buffoon," 163;
  replies to Parker, 163 _seq._;
  intercedes, 168;
  abused by Parker in _History of His Own Time_, 170 _n._;
  _The Rehearsall Transpros'd_ (second part), 171-2;
  pictures Parker, 172 _seq._;
  latterly fears subversion of Protestant faith, 179;
  his famous pamphlet, _An Account of the Growth of Popery and Arbitrary
    Government in England_, 180-1, 203-5, 206-8;
  gives account of quarrel with Dutch, 186-7;
  commendatory verses on "_Mr. Milton's Paradise Lost_" (1674), 199 _n._;
  mock speech, _His Majesty's Most Gracious Speech to Both Houses of
    Parliament_, 200-2;
  story of proffered bribe, 209-10;
  last letter to constituents, 210;
  rarely speaks in the House of Commons, 211;
  longest reported speech, 211;
  speech reported in _Parliamentary History_ (1677), 211;
  "_Debate on Mr. Andrew Marvell's striking Sir Philip Harcourt_,"
    etc., 212-14;
  friend of Prince Rupert, 214;
  lines on setting up of king's statue, 214-15;
  "Britannia and Raleigh," 216-19;
  dies, 219;
  thought to have been poisoned, 219;
  this suspicion dissipated, 220;
  account of sickness and death, 220-1;
  burial, 221;
  obsequies, 223;
  epitaph, 221;
  humour and wit, 163;
  not a fanatic, 179;
  insatiable curiosity, 182;
  power of self-repression, 211;
  as poet, 225-30;
  as satirist, 228, 230-1;
  as prose writer, 231-2;
  love of gardens, 227;
  appearance described, 232;
  Hull's most famous member, 223;
  enemies, 224;
  portraits of, 224;
  statue of, 224;
  editions of works, 229.

Marvell, Rev. Andrew (father), 7.

---- Mary (wife), 3, 222-3.

"Marvell's Cottage," 223 _n._

_Marvell's Ghost_ (in _Poems on Affairs of State_), 220 _n._

May, 119.

Mead, William, 191.

Meadows, Philip, 51, 54.

Medway, 139, 187.

_Memorials_ (Whitelock), 29.

Milton, John, 2, 19, 20, 21, 48, 49, 52, 64, 68, 69, 73, 76, 77, 91,
129, 151, 199, 223, 226, 228.

Monk, General, Duke of Albemarle, 80, 83, 91, 128, 139, 140.

---- Dr., Provost of Eton. 94.

Monmouth, Duke of, 116, 191.

Monument ("tall bully"), 118.

More (Moore), Thomas, 7.

More, Robert, 6.

Morpeth, Lord, 113.

Moscow, 105, 107.

"Mr. Milton's Paradise Lost" (Marvell), 199 _n._

_Musa Cantabrigiensis_, 16.

Muskerry, Lord, 115.


N

Napoleon, 24.

_Narrative of the Restoration_ (Collins), 81.

National Portrait Gallery, 224.

Navigation Act, 59, 63.

Nettleton, Robert, 64;
  (Marvell's grand-nephew), 221.

New Amsterdam, 136.

New Guinea, 127.

Novgorod, 113.

Nunappleton House, 63.

_Nymph and Fawn, The_, 230.

_Nymph complaining for the Death of her Fawn, The_, 225.


O

Oaths Bill, 202, 205.

_Oceana_ (James Harrington), 222.

_Ode upon Cromwell's Return from Ireland, The_, 34.

_Omniana_ (Southey), 20 _n._

Opdam, Admiral, 115, 129.

Orleans, Duchess of, 185.

Ormond, Duke of, 196.

Orrery, 150.

Owen, Dr. John, 81.

Oxenbridge, John, 51.

Oxford, 116.


P

_Paradise Lost_, 10, 52, 69, 91.

_Paradise Regained_, 91.

Parker, Dr. Samuel, 9, 151-3, 155, 157, 159-60, 162-3, 167, 171-2, 211.

_Parliamentary History_, 211.

Paston, Sir Robert, 114.

Pattison, Mark, _Essays_, 230.

Peak, Sir William, 215.

Pease, Anne, 6.

Pelican (Inn), 21.

Pell, J., D.D., 222.

Pembroke, Earl of, 202.

Penderel, Richard, 222.

Penn, William, 191.

Pensionary or Long Parliament, 95, 96, 135.

Pepys, Samuel, 69, 90, 95, 96, 113, 117, 118, 120, 121;
  _Diary_, 129.

Pett, Mr. Commissioner, 133.

"Petty Navy Royal" (Dee), 56;
  (quoted), 57, 58.

Pickering, Sir Gilbert, 69.

_Pilgrim's Progress, The_, 158.

Plymouth, 136.

"_Poem upon the Death of his late Highness the Protector, A_," 74.

_Poems_ (1081), 223.

_Poems and Satires of Andrew Marvell_, 47 _n._

_Poems on Affairs of State_, 228.

Poleroone, 127, 136.

"_Politic Plat (plan) for the Honour of the Prince, A_," 56.

Poll Bill, 122.

Ponder, Nathaniel, 171.

Pope, 34, 130, 229.

Popish Plot, 219.

Popple, Edmund, 6.

---- William, 6.

_Portland Papers_, 116 _n._

Portsmouth, 136.

Pride, Colonel, 94.

Prince of Orange, 63.

Prynne, 96.

{Greek: Pyretologia} (Richard Morton), 220.


Q

Quarles, 226.


R

Ramsden, John, 78, 84, 95.

---- William. 189, 210.

_Rehearsal_ (Duke of Buckingham), 154;
  quoted, 154-5.

_Rehearsal Transprosed, The_ (quoted), 23-4, 51 _n._, 151, 152n., 162;
  (second part), 171;
  quoted, 172-8, 211.

_Religio Laici_, 24 _n._

_Reproof to the Rehearsal Transprosed_ (quoted), 162, 168, 169 _seq._

Reynolds, Dr., Bishop of Norwich, 93.

Riga, 113.

Robinson, Matthew, 11.

Rochester, Earl of, 226.

Rome, 193.

Roos Divorce Bill, 148, 149.

"Rota" Club, 3, 76.

Rouen, 139, 139 _n._

_Royal Charles, The_, 115, 136.

Rump Parliament, 81, 82, 83.

Rupert, Prince, 3, 214.

Rushworth, 28.


S

St. Giles's Church in the Fields, 221.

St. John, Oliver, 51.

_Saint's Rest_ (Baxter), 151.

_Samson Agonistes_, 91.

Santa Cruz, 69.

Savoy Conference, 90, 101, 103, 104.

Scotland, 204.

Scroggs, Lord Chief Justice, 100.

_Secunda defensio_, 52.

_Select Poets_ (Hazlitt), 230.

Shadwell, 20, 21.

Shaftesbury, Earl of, 205.

Sharp, Archbishop, 224.

Sheerness, 127, 128, 136.

Sheldon, Dr., Archbishop of Canterbury, 153.

Shirley (dramatist), 118, 222.

Shrewsbury, Lady, 196.

Sidney Sussex College, 219.

Skinner, Mrs., 18.

Skynner, Mr., 54.

Sluys, 186.

Smith, Mr. Goldwin, 123 _n._

Sobieski, John, 214.

_Social England Illustrated_, 56 _n._

Solemn League and Covenant, 29.

_Song of Agincourt_ (Drayton), 70.

Southampton, Lord, 95, 203.

Southey, 226.

Spain, 183, 184.

Specimens (Campbell), 230.

_Specimens_ of Early English Poets (Mr. George Ellis), 229.

_State Trials_, 191.

Sterne, Bishop of Carlisle, 94.

Stockholm, 113.

Surat, 113, 194.

Surinam, 187.

Sutton, Mrs., 202.

Swift, Benjamin, 152, 231. {Transcriber's note: Referred to by surname
                            only in the text. Probably means Jonathan.}


T

_Table Talk_ (Selden), 179.

Tait, Archbishop, 23.

Temple, Sir William, 183.

_Tender Conscience_, 161;
  quoted, 161-2.

_Tentamina Physico-Theologica_ (Parker), 174.

Test Bill, 188.

Texel, 127.

Thompson, Captain Edward, 10, 64, 68, 73, 84, 202 _n._, 221, 223, 224, 229.

Thurloe, John, 50, 52.

_To his Coy Mistress_, 66, 225, 230.

Torbay, 136.

Tower, The, 206.

_Travels and Voyages_ (Harris), 106.

_Treatise on Education_ (Milton), 9.

"Treatise on the breeding of the Horse," 32.

Treaty of Dover, 184, 150 _n._, 186.

Treby, George, M.P., 219.

Trench, Dean, 67 _n._

Trevor, 150.

Trinity Church, Hull, 223.

---- College, Cambridge, 10.

---- House, 100.

Triple Alliance, The, 183, 184, 186.

Trot, Sir John, 197.

_True Greatness of Kingdoms and Estates, The_ (Bacon), 60.

_Truth and Innocence Vindicated_ (Owen), 153.

Turner, Sir Edward, 135.


U

_Unreformed House of Commons, The_ (Porritt), 96 _n._

Upnor Castle, 128.

"Upon His House," 138.

_Upon Appleton House_, 230.

_Upon the Hill and Grove of Billborow_, 230.

Urquhart, Sir Thomas, 89.


V

Vane, Sir Harry, 89.

Van Tromp, 59, 61, 63, 115.

Vere, Lord, 32.

Villiers, George, Duke of Buckingham, 33.

Viner, Sir Robert, 214, 215.

Virginia, 58.


W

Walcheren, 186.

Walker, 226.

Waller, 73, 144, 145 _n._, 226.

"Walton's _Life_" (Wotton), 19;
  quoted, 20.

Ward, Seth, 153 _n._  {Transcriber's Note: 152}

Watts, Dr., 65.

Weckerlin, Georg Rudolph, 49;
  Latin Secretary to Parliament, 49 _n._, 50.

Welch, Mr., 210.

Westminster Hall, 140.

---- Parliament of, 83.

White, Bishop of Ely, 13.

Whitehall, 117.

Whitelock's _Memorials_, 29.

_William and Margaret_ (Mallet), 65.

Wine Licenses, 196.

Winestead, 4.

Wise, Lieutenant, 140.

Wither, 226.

Wood, Anthony, 25.

Wordsworth, 229.

Worshipful Society of Masters and Pilots of Trinity House, 84.


Y

Yarmouth, 58.

York, Duchess of, 193, 196.

---- Duke of, 115, 188, 189.

_Young Love_, 225, 229, 230.




ENGLISH MEN OF LETTERS


Edited by JOHN MORLEY
Cloth 12mo 75 cents net, each

       *       *       *       *       *

GEORGE ELIOT. By Leslie Stephen.

WILLIAM HAZLITT. By Augustine Birrell.

MATTHEW ARNOLD. By Herbert W. Paul.

JOHN RUSKIN. By Frederic Harrison.

JOHN GREENLEAF WHITTIER. By Thomas W. Higginson.

ALFRED TENNYSON. By Alfred Lyall.

SAMUEL RICHARDSON. By Austin Dobson.

ROBERT BROWNING. By G.K. Chesterton.

CRABBE. By Alfred Ainger.

FANNY BURNEY. By Austin Dobson.

JEREMY TAYLOR. By Edmund Gosse.

ROSSETTI. By Arthur C. Benson.

MARIA EDGEWORTH. By the Hon. Emily Lawless.

HOBBES. By Leslie Stephen.

ADAM SMITH. By Francis W. Hirst.

THOMAS MOORE. By Stephen Gwynn.

SYDNEY SMITH. By George W.E. Russell.

WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT. By William A. Bradley.

WILLIAM HICKLING PRESCOTT. By Harry Thurston Peck.

EDWARD FITZGERALD. By A.C. Benson.

ANDREW MARVELL. By Augustine Birrell.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
64-66 Fifth Avenue, New York




ENGLISH MEN OF LETTERS


Edited by JOHN MORLEY

The earlier issues of this series are also to be had conveniently bound
in twelve uniform volumes.

Cloth. $1.00 per volume

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAUCER. By Adolphus William Ward.
SPENSER. By R.W. Church.
DRYDEN. By George Saintsbury.

MILTON. By Mark Pattison, B.D.
GOLDSMITH. By William Black.
COWPER. By Goldwin Smith.

BYRON. By John Nichol.
SHELLEY. By John Addington Symonds.
KEATS. By Sidney Colvin, M.A.

WORDSWORTH. By F.W.H. Myers.
SOUTHEY. By Edward Dowden.
LANDOR. By Sidney Colvin, M.A.

LAMB. By Alfred Ainger.
ADDISON. By W.J. Courthope.
SWIFT. By Leslie Stephen.

SCOTT. By Richard H. Hutton.
BURNS. By Principal Shairp.
COLERIDGE. By H.D. Traill.

HUME. By T.H. Huxley, F.R.S.
LOCKE. By Thomas Fowler.
BURKE. By John Morley.

FIELDING. By Austin Dobson.
THACKERAY. By Anthony Trollope.
DICKENS. By Adolphus William Ward.

GIBBON. By J. Cotter Morison.
CARLYLE. By John Nichol.
MACAULAY. By J. Cotter Morison.

SIDNEY. By J.A. Symonds.
DE QUINCEY.  By David Masson.
SHERIDAN. By Mrs. Oliphant.

POPE. By Leslie Stephen.
JOHNSON. By Leslie Stephen.
GRAY. By Edmund Gosse.

BACON. By R.W. Church.
BUNYAN. By J.A. Froude.
BENTLEY. By R.C. Jebb.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
64-66 Fifth Avenue, New York




ENGLISH MEN OF LETTERS


Edited by JOHN MORLEY
Cloth 12mo 40 cents each

       *       *       *       *       *

ADDISON. By W.J. Courthope.
BACON. By R.W. Church.
BENTLEY. By Prof. Jebb.
BUNYAN. By J.A. Froude.
BURKE. By John Morley.
BURNS. By Principal Shairp.
BYRON. By Prof. Nichol.
CARLYLE. By Prof. Nichol.
CHAUCER. By Prof. A.W. Ward.
COLERIDGE. By H.D. Traill.
COWPER. By Goldwin Smith.
DEFOE. By W. Minto.
DE QUINCEY. By Prof. Masson.
DICKENS. By A.W. Ward.
DRYDEN. By G. Saintsbury.
FIELDING. By Austin Dobson.
GIBBON. By J. Cotter Morison.
GOLDSMITH. By William Black.
GRAY. By Edmund Gosse.
JOHNSON. By Leslie Stephen.
HUME. By T.H. Huxley.
KEATS. By Sidney Colvin.
LAMB. By Alfred Ainger.
LANDOR. By Sidney Colvin.
LOCKE. By Prof. Fowler.
MACAULAY. By J. Cotter Morison.
MILTON. By Mark Pattison.
POPE. By Leslie Stephen.
SCOTT. By R.H. Hutton.
SHELLEY. By J.A. Symonds.
SHERIDAN. By Mrs. Oliphant.
SIR PHILIP SIDNEY. By J.A. Symonds.
SOUTHEY. By Prof. Dowden.
SPENSER. By R.W. Church.
STERNE. By H.D. Traill.
SWIFT. By Leslie Stephen.
THACKERAY. By A. Trollope.
WORDSWORTH. By F.W.H. Myers.

       *       *       *       *       *

The MacMillan Company
64-66 Fifth Avenue, New York



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANDREW MARVELL***


******* This file should be named 17388-8.txt or 17388-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/7/3/8/17388



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook, Father Thrift and His Animal Friends, by
Joseph Charles Sindelar, Illustrated by Helen Geraldine Hodge


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Father Thrift and His Animal Friends


Author: Joseph Charles Sindelar



Release Date: July 23, 2013  [eBook #43287]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FATHER THRIFT AND HIS ANIMAL
FRIENDS***


E-text prepared by David Edwards, Matthew Wheaton, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images
generously made available by Internet Archive (https://archive.org)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the lovely original illustrations.
      See 43287-h.htm or 43287-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/43287/43287-h/43287-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/43287/43287-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/fatherthrift00sind





FATHER THRIFT AND HIS ANIMAL FRIENDS

by

JOSEPH C. SINDELAR

Author of
The Nixie Bunny Books

With Pictures by Helen Geraldine Hodge







Beckley-Cardy Company
Chicago


       *       *       *       *       *

    BOOKS BY JOSEPH C. SINDELAR
    BOW-WOW AND MEW-MEW (Craik-Sindelar). Illustrated in colors.
    NIXIE BUNNY IN MANNERS-LAND. Illustrated in colors.
    NIXIE BUNNY IN WORKADAY-LAND. Illustrated in colors.
    NIXIE BUNNY IN HOLIDAY-LAND. Illustrated in colors.
    NIXIE BUNNY IN FARAWAY-LANDS. Illustrated in colors.
    FATHER THRIFT AND HIS ANIMAL FRIENDS. Illustrated in black and color.
    MORNING EXERCISES FOR ALL THE YEAR.
    BEST MEMORY GEMS.
    BRIGHT ENTERTAINMENTS FOR CHRISTMAS.
    THE BEST THANKSGIVING BOOK.
    THE BEST CHRISTMAS BOOK.
    MERRY CHRISTMAS ENTERTAINMENTS.
    CLOSING DAY ENTERTAINMENTS.

       *       *       *       *       *


Copyright, 1918, by Joseph C. Sindelar
All Rights Reserved

Printed in the United States of America




    To
    Joseph C. Jr.
    and
    his friends




CONTENTS


   PAGE

   The Queer Little Old Man                 11
   The Little Old Man Decides               17
   His First Day in the Forest              23
   Great Gray Owl                           29
   The Animals of the Forest                35
   What Made the Bear Sick                  41
   How the Woodpeckers Helped               47
   The Busy Beavers                         53
   The Gray Foxes and the Red Foxes         59
   Red Squirrel and Bunny Cottontail        65
   Shaggy Bear's Mistake                    71
   The Sweetest Thing in the Forest         77
   Robins, Crows, and Blackbirds            85
   The Little Raindrops                     91
   Trouble in the Forest                    97
   Two Bad Boys                            103
   The Boys and the Birds                  109
   Insects and Worms                       115
   After Many Days                         123



Rudolph argues that after a false start in trying to emulate the English in an attempt to overcome his timidity, Gandhi discovered the inner courage he was seeking by helping his countrymen in South Africa. The new courage consisted of observing the traditional Bengali way of "self-suffering" and, in finding his own courage, he was enabled also to point out the way of 'Satyagraha' and 'ahimsa' to the whole of India.[194] Gandhi's writings expressed four meanings of freedom: as India's national independence; as individual political freedom; as group freedom from poverty; and as the capacity for personal self-rule.[195]
Gandhi was a self-described philosophical anarchist,[196] and his vision of India meant an India without an underlying government.[197] He once said that "the ideally nonviolent state would be an ordered anarchy."[198] While political systems are largely hierarchical, with each layer of authority from the individual to the central government have increasing levels of authority over the layer below, Gandhi believed that society should be the exact opposite, where nothing is done without the consent of anyone, down to the individual. His idea was that true self-rule in a country means that every person rules his or herself and that there is no state which enforces laws upon the people.[199]
This would be achieved over time with nonviolent conflict mediation, as power is divested from layers of hierarchical authorities, ultimately to the individual, which would come to embody the ethic of nonviolence. Rather than a system where rights are enforced by a higher authority, people are self-governed by mutual responsibilities. On returning from South Africa, when Gandhi received a letter asking for his participation in writing a world charter for human rights, he responded saying, "in my experience, it is far more important to have a charter for human duties."[200]
A free India did not mean merely transferring the established British administrative structure into Indian hands. He warned, "you would make India English. And when it becomes English, it will be called not Hindustan but Englishtan. This is not the Swaraj I want."[201] Tewari argues that Gandhi saw democracy as more than a system of government; it meant promoting both individuality and the self-discipline of the community. Democracy was a moral system that distributed power and assisted the development of every social class, especially the lowest. It meant settling disputes in a nonviolent manner; it required freedom of thought and expression. For Gandhi, democracy was a way of life.[202]


Introduction


    As from the days your father's father knew,
    This little story book now comes to you.
    So when you turn its pages, heed them well:
    Though strange the stories, many truths they tell.

    They tell of animals and birds and trees,
    Of children, flowers, and honeybees;
    Of a queer old man, and a quaint old town
    With crooked streets that ran up and down.

    They tell of these and many, many more.
    Still, this I'd add to what has gone before:
    In the wood there grows a tree--the thrifty tree--
    As wonderful as anything can be!

    Its trunk is copper; silver are its leaves;
    Its blossoms from bright golden threads it weaves;
    Its fruit is health and wealth and honest joy--
    So seek this goodly tree, wise girl and boy.




FATHER THRIFT AND HIS ANIMAL FRIENDS




THE QUEER LITTLE OLD MAN


Once upon a time, in a quaint old town, there lived a queer little old
man. His name was Thrift--Father Thrift people called him, although he
really was no father at all.

As I said before, he was just a queer little old man. He had no wife,
no children, no home of his own.

But he had a kind heart within his queer little body. Also, he had
willing hands and feet, and these brought him many friends.

How old the queer little man was, or how long he had lived in the
quaint old town, no one seemed to know.

The present grandfathers and grandmothers remembered how the queer
little man used to take them, as children, on his lap and tell them
stories.

He had told the same stories to their children and to their children's
children. Yet to none of them did he look any different to-day than he
did when they first saw him.

You must not think that telling stories was all the queer little old
man had to do. He was a sort of all-round village helper. He helped
everybody who needed help.

But it was for his good advice that the queer little old man was most
sought. He always thought well for everybody, and the people profited
by following his teaching.

Sita (also spelled Seeta or Seetha Hindustani pronunciation: [sītā],  listen (help·info) meaning "furrow") is the central female character of the Hindu epic Ramayana.[1][2] She is the consort of the Hindu god Rama (avatar of Vishnu) and is an avatar of Lakshmi, goddess of wealth and wife of Vishnu. She is esteemed as a standard-setter for wifely and womanly virtues for all Hindu women.[3] Sita is known for her dedication, self-sacrifice, courage and purity.
Sita is described as the daughter of the earth goddess Bhūmi and the adopted daughter of King Janaka of Mithila and Queen Sunayna. In her youth, she marries Rama, the prince of Ayodhya. Soon after her marriage, she is forced into exile with her husband and brother-in-law Lakshmana. While in exile, the trio settle in the Dandaka forest, from where she is abducted by the Ravana, Rakshasa King of Lanka. She is imprisoned in the Ashoka Vatika of Lanka by Ravana. Sita is finally rescued by Rama in the climatic war where Rama slays Ravana. Sita proves her chastity by undergoing a trial by fire. Thereafter, Rama and Sita return to Ayodhya, where they are crowned as king and queen. However, Rama abandons a pregnant Sita, when one of his subjects casts doubt over her chastity. In the refuge of Sage Valmiki's hermitage Sita gives birth to twins Lava and Kusha. After her sons grow up and unite with their father, Sita returns to her mother, the Earth's womb for release from a cruel world.


In fact, the whole town grew prosperous, _extremely_ prosperous, by
heeding Father Thrift's advice.

You would suppose that the queer little old man would be well
rewarded.

Not so! For when these people became very, _very_ prosperous, they
felt that the queer little old man was only in their way.

What further need had they of his advice?

He had taught them to live simply, to spend wisely, and to waste
nothing. He had taught them to enjoy simple pleasures and to form
simple habits.

"Of what good is time or money, body or brain, if we do not know how
to use any of them?" he would say.

"What will become of good health if we do not take care of it?

"Of what good is study-time or play-time unless we get the most we can
out of it?

"Or of what worth is life itself if we waste it?"

But the townspeople would not listen to him now. Young Mr. Spendthrift
had come to town and they followed him. They only laughed at Father
Thrift.

"Poor, queer old man!" they said. "He must be out of his head."

And they began to spend money foolishly, and to waste their time and
their health as well as their money.

_How_ it grieved the queer little old man to see things go so!

Day after day he would sit with his head in his hands, thinking,
thinking, _thinking_. (He liked to think even better than most people
like to eat.)

Then one day, after he had sat for a long, long time thinking, he got
up and exclaimed: "At last, at last I have it! I'm sure I have it,
this time. Yes, I'm sure."

And those who heard the queer little old man said: "Just as we told
you. Poor fellow, he's out of his head! Some of the wheels up here
have gotten badly out of order." And they pointed to their foreheads.

But the old man heard them not. Or if he heard he lost no sleep on
account of what they said.




THE LITTLE OLD MAN DECIDES


The next day the whole town was busy--very busy--gossiping. Everybody
told everybody else what the queer little old man had been overheard
to say.

But where was the little old man?

Now that they thought of it, who had seen him since the night before?

Nobody!

Where could he be? Had he dropped through a crack in the floor, his
disappearance could not have been more sudden or more complete.

Every one was excited. It was not that the town cared particularly
about the queer little old man. It was not that, at all. Only the
people were curious to learn where he could have gone or what could
have happened to him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Leading from the town was a crooked road that was traveled but little.
At the end of the road was a great forest where there lived many
animals and birds.

Had any of the townspeople been up very, very early on the morning
that the queer little old man disappeared, they need not have been so
excited.

For on that morning a bent little figure might have been seen trudging
along the crooked road leading toward the forest.

The man was dressed poorly, almost shabbily. He walked slowly, and
seemed to be deep in thought.

Over his shoulder he carried a cane. From it hung a bag made of a big
red figured handkerchief.

Apparently the man was on a journey, and the big red figured
handkerchief was his traveling bag.

The fat, round-faced Moon Man smiled down from his home in the sky at
the little figure in the road. His mouth seemed to move, and I am sure
he was saying:

"Go, brave little old man. Go where you've decided to go.

"If you are going to the forest, you will no doubt find a welcome
there. Some animals and birds are better as friends than are some
people.

"Anyway, the great forest is in need of your lessons. I will light the
way for you. May the good spirits attend you!"

And in the stillness of the early morning the queer little old man of
the quaint old town might have been heard to answer:

"So I have decided. Come what may, I shall be satisfied.

"Thank you, kind Moon Man, for your good wishes and for your bright
light."

And on and on he trudged.

The orange sun was peeping its head above the horizon when the queer
little old man reached the edge of the forest.

What warmth the glorious sun gave! His rays gave warmth of heart as
well as warmth of body.

The old man sat down on a log, to rest his tired legs and to take a
bite to eat.

Then a voice within the queer little old man began to talk.

It said: "Perhaps, after all, you should not have left the quaint old
town. You were a coward to run away.

"Ever since young Mr. Spendthrift came there to live you have been
discontented. And when the people began to take his advice rather than
yours, you grew angry and left.

"Is that the way for an old man to do who always had plenty to eat and
to wear?"

But another voice with a fiery little temper was waiting to be heard.

"What!" it cried, "have you no principle? Are you a worm, to be
stepped upon?

"Waste is wrong, no matter what you waste. Thrift is right and forever
will be.

"Therefore, hie you to the heart of the forest as you have decided.
You will at least have peace of mind, and surely that is worth as much
as 'plenty to eat and to wear'!"




HIS FIRST DAY IN THE FOREST


At last Father Thrift was in the heart of the forest.

It was very peaceful there.

The wind rustled the leaves on the trees.

The birds flew among the branches and sang and talked and scolded.

Do birds ever scold?

Oh, my, yes! You should hear the mother birds, sometimes, when the
father birds waste their time about the house and the baby birds are
hungry!

But this morning nearly everything in the forest seemed happy.

The squirrels leaped from tree to tree.

Robin sang his merry "Cheer-up! chee, chee! Cheer-up! chee, chee!" And
he sang it again and again.

I think he tried to say: "Welcome, queer little old man! Welcome to
the forest!" (Besides, he _may_ have found some good fat worms to
eat.)

The dry leaves and small twigs crackled under the little old man's
feet as he walked along.

He could hear the soft, rippling sound of the water as it ran over the
stones in the brook.

He knew that in the shade of the bending willow trees little fishes
played in the water.

Blue sky was above him. Green grass was all around him. Flowers grew
at his feet.

Was not the forest a glorious place in which to be!

The queer little old man drew in a deep, deep breath.

The air was filled with the perfume of the pine trees.

"Tap, tap, tap!" Who is disturbing the peace of the forest? It sounds
like a carpenter with his hammer.

"Tap, tap, tap!" There it goes again.

The queer little old man looked around.

"Oh, there you are, you little redhead!" he said.

It was Woodpecker. Funny bird! How swiftly he climbs the trunk of the
tree!

"Tap, tap, tap!" he knocks with his bill. "Come out from under the
bark, you bugs!" he cries. "I want some dinner."

But the bugs do not always come. So Woodpecker bores a hole in the
decayed part of the tree and with his bill goes after them.

Does he get them? Yes, indeed; so quickly does he work that the poor
little bugs wouldn't have time to whistle for help even if they knew
how.

"Curious fellow, that!" said the queer little old man. "He is
industrious, too.

"He reminds me of the hop-toad that came to one of the gardens last
summer.

"The toad, too, used to catch and eat the bugs. By doing so he saved
many a plant from being destroyed.

"But what a homely old fellow he was! And how handsome the woodpecker
is!

"It is quite true that one does not grow to look like what he eats,
but rather like what he thinks.

"The hop-toad lives so close to the ground that he sees only the brown
earth. And if he thinks at all he thinks of _that_.

"But the woodpecker flies in the air and lives in the trees.

"He sees the blue sky and the pretty flowers and the silvery brook.
There is beauty all around him. And if you wish to know of what _he_
thinks, just see how he _looks_."

Thus the queer old man spent his first day in the forest. Every little
thing interested him. He watched the busy bees at work. He traced the
footprints of bears and rabbits and deer in the soft ground along the
brook.

But at last night came and spread its cover of darkness over all.

In a cave the queer little man made a soft bed of dry leaves. Then he
lay down to sleep.

"Friends, good-night," he whispered to the forest.

And the trees rustled back, "Good-night, good-night."




GREAT GRAY OWL


Great Gray Owl sat up in the tree, winking and blinking.

He would turn his head first in one direction, then in another.

Wise old bird! What he could not see with those large glassy eyes of
his was hardly worth seeing.

Suddenly he flew to the ground. There, like a brave sentinel, he
marched back and forth in front of the cave in which Father Thrift was
sleeping.

Several times in the night the queer little old man heard the hooting
of the owl. More than once he thought he heard the wise bird say,
"Who-oo, who-oo goes there?"

The first time a sharp "Hiss-ss, hiss-ss!" came in reply. Father
Thrift shivered to think of a snake crawling so near him.

Then he heard the owl's sharp command: "Halt! What is your business
here?"

"I'm visiting friends that live in a hole in that cave," replied the
snake.

"I advise you to do your visiting some other time," said the owl.
"Father Thrift is sleeping in the cave to-night. He must not be
disturbed."

With the snake the owl's word was law. He had known of several snakes
that had shortened their lives by not taking the wise bird's advice.

"Such strong claws, such a hooked bill, such sharp eyes, are not to be
trifled with," thought the snake, as he wriggled along toward home.
"But what is the forest coming to when one can't visit his friends?
Besides, who is Father Thrift, anyway?"

Just then Great Gray Owl called to the snake: "Come to the cave,
here, at ten o'clock in the morning and don't forget. Tell your
friends to come, too. There will be a meeting of all the animals of
the forest."

As he finished saying this the owl heard a loud crackling of twigs and
a rustling of leaves behind him. He turned around just in time to face
Shaggy Bear.

"What, ho, Friend Owl!" cried the bear. "What are you about this
evening? Are you looking for wee mice or for tender little bunnies?"

"No," said Great Gray Owl, "not to-night. I am keeping watch so that
Father Thrift may not be disturbed in his sleep."

"And who, pray, may Father Thrift be?" asked Shaggy Bear.

"To-morrow, at ten o'clock in the morning, if you will come back here,
you may learn who Father Thrift is. For the present I will say that
the cave in which you have been in the habit of sleeping will be
Father Thrift's home in the future."

"So, so!" growled Shaggy Bear. "So, _so_!" (He spoke this last rather
crossly.)

"Yes," said Great Gray Owl, "that, at least, has been decided."

Then he went on: "Aren't you glad it was _your_ cave that was chosen
for Father Thrift? Aren't you _glad_? Think of the honor it will be to
you to have him use it! Just _think_ of it!"

What a fine fellow the owl was, to be sure, to give other people's
things away so generously!

As for the bear, whether he thought of the honor or not, I cannot say.
He never was known to be much of a thinker.

Nevertheless the owl's tactful words soothed him, and he felt quite
satisfied to leave things as they were.

"I know of other caves and of hollows in trees where I can sleep,"
said Shaggy Bear. "When I'm full of honey I don't care!"

That the bear was full of honey seemed quite clear.

Indeed, if you might judge by outside appearances, he was over full.
The sticky stuff was running down his chin, and he kept wiping it off
with his big paw as he walked away in lazy bear fashion.

Before morning all the animals of the wood, and the birds and the
bees, knew that at ten o'clock there would be a meeting at the cave.

What it was about or who Father Thrift was, not one of them knew. That
is, no one knew except the owl; and he wouldn't say.




THE ANIMALS OF THE FOREST


The next morning the sun was up before Father Thrift. In fact, when he
awoke the sun had already taken the sparkling dewdrops away on a
journey back to the clouds.

The sky was bright. The birds were singing, the insects humming. And
the flowers were smiling and thanking the sun for the warmth and the
light.

Father Thrift rubbed his eyes and looked about him. Something was
wrong, very wrong!

The rooster wasn't crowing. The dog wasn't barking. The horses weren't
neighing. Those were familiar sounds to Father Thrift's ears. And he
missed them.

He drew a deep breath. The air was sweet with the odor of fir trees
and of pine.

"Ah," he said, "how could I have forgotten that only yesterday I left
the quaint old town!

"This, then, is my new home in the forest. It is a glorious home!"

Soon the queer little old man had his breakfast. He had freshly picked
berries and bread, and clear, cool water from a spring near by.

Then he sat down on a log, to think.

Suddenly he heard a great rustling of leaves and a flapping and
fluttering of wings.

Turning around, he found himself face to face with such a gathering of
animals and birds as he had never in his life seen.

And at his elbow stood--who do you suppose? Great Gray Owl, whom he
had heard hoot in the night.

Before Father Thrift had time to ask what the gathering was about,
Great Gray Owl rolled his big eyes and said: "Father Thrift, permit me
to introduce to you the animals of the forest."

"I am happy to meet you all," said Father Thrift kindly.

Then the animals gave a shout that sounded like three cheers and a
hundred tigers.

Do you wonder at that? You will not when I tell you all that were
present.

There were the shaggy bears, the red foxes, the busy beavers, the gray
wolves, the cottontail rabbits, the bushytail squirrels, the
woodchucks, the chipmunks, and the deer.

Then there were the eagles, the owls, the hawks, the crows, the blue
jays, and the robins, and many others of the bird family. Even the
honeybees and the butterflies, the insects and the snakes were there.

Indeed, all the animals of the forest must have been present, there
were so many.

It was wonderful how quickly they had learned of Father Thrift's
coming to their home.

Now the Great Gray Owl was waving a stick in the air, motioning for
silence.

When everything was quiet, he perched himself on a tall stump, where
every one could see him, and made a speech.

"Father Thrift," he said, "we welcome you to the forest. We are glad
that you have come to live with us.

"Many years ago we birds and animals had a king. But he died and since
then things have not gone well with us.

"We have not lived wisely. I fear many of us have wasted when we had
plenty, and suffered when what we had was gone.

"If you will be our king, we will promise to do exactly as you say."

He rolled his big eyes at the animals and asked, "Won't we?" And every
one of the animals shouted, "We will!"

But Father Thrift declared that he would rather be only one of them,
instead of being their ruler.

He would advise them, and teach them, and help them.

"And we will help you, too," said Shaggy Bear. "I'll give you my cave
for keeps, to begin with."

"And I'll bring you nuts to eat," said Bushytail Squirrel.

"And I'll bring you some of my honey," said Honeybee. "That is, I will
if Shaggy Bear doesn't steal it all."

"And I'll bring you plenty of mice," said Great Gray Owl.

But Father Thrift only smiled at that. For, of course, mice would be
of no use to him!




WHAT MADE THE BEAR SICK


Father Thrift was busy carrying pine needles into his cave. Pine
needles make a soft carpet. And the bare floor of the cave was _so_
hard.

At last he had enough and he sat down to rest.

Just then he looked out of his cave and saw Shaggy Bear, half walking,
half crawling toward him.

"Why, whatever is the matter?" Father Thrift exclaimed in
astonishment.

"I am so sick I believe I shall die," groaned the bear. The poor
fellow's face was pale and tears were running down his cheeks.

"Oh, cheer up, cheer up!" cried Father Thrift briskly. "Why should you
_want_ to die?"

"That's it--I don't!" returned the bear sorrowfully. "But I believe my
time has come."

"Where do you feel the worst--in your stomach?" asked Father Thrift.

"Yes," replied Shaggy Bear. "That is where the trouble started."

"I thought so; I thought so," said Father Thrift. "I wonder that you
were not sick before.

"Now, first of all, let me tell you that you are not going to die, not
yet. But should you keep on eating as you have eaten in the past few
weeks, you could never expect to be strong and healthy."

"Why?" asked the bear, brightening up suddenly.

But Father Thrift did not answer his question.

"I am going to suggest something for you to do, Shaggy," he said.

The bear looked puzzled but hopeful.

"You won't like it," Father Thrift continued. "No one ever did. But it
is the only way by which you can become well and strong again.

"The very first time I saw you I knew that you were not eating the
right kind of meals.

"Why, bears are known to have such good appetites that we often hear
boys say, 'I'm as hungry as a bear!'

"But you don't feel that way. That is because you eat too much honey
and not enough solid, nourishing food.

"This makes you sick. And while perhaps you wouldn't die from it, you
would grow to be cross and disagreeable. Then no one would like you.
Would that be any better?"

The bear scratched his head. "But what am I to do?" he asked.

"Stop eating sweets for three months," advised Father Thrift. "Don't
you see that you spoil your appetite for good roots and berries by
eating too much honey?

"What, do you suppose, would become of boys and girls who ate nothing
but cookies and candy, instead of milk and eggs, and meat and bread,
and vegetables and fruit?

"A little candy, when eaten after meals, seldom hurts anybody. When
you are better you may have a little honey again, too.

"Another thing. Besides eating and sleeping, what do you do?"

"Nothing," replied Shaggy Bear.

"Hereafter you must spend some time each day working or walking or
playing outdoors," said Father Thrift. "You need exercise.

"Don't be afraid to run. That will fill your lungs with pure, fresh
air and make your blood circulate more freely.

"Eat only three meals a day and be regular. Do not eat between meals.
Remember that the stomach works hard and needs rest as much as do your
feet.

"Eat slowly and chew your food well, and I promise that at the end of
three months you will feel better than you have ever felt in your
life."

The bear made a wry face at all this. For he liked honey about as much
as he disliked exercise.

"Mayn't I eat _some_ honey?" he asked pleadingly.

Father Thrift looked at him a little sternly.

"None for three months," he said.

Shaggy Bear was in earnest and at once promised to do as he was told.

Then, as the bear rose to go, Father Thrift patted him on the back.

"You mustn't let this spoil your good times," he said. "Only remember
that nobody can be happy without good health."

It was a hard trial for the bear.

Many, many times he was tempted to stuff himself with honey and then
roll up in his cave and go to sleep. But each time he turned sadly
away from temptation.

And at the end of three months he was as sound and healthy as a bear
could be. Then how grateful he was to Father Thrift for his good
advice!

And the queer little old man was happy to think that he had been able
to help Shaggy so much.




HOW THE WOODPECKERS HELPED


One morning, as Father Thrift was sitting in front of his cave sunning
himself, he heard some one crying.

It was a squeaky sort of cry.

Father Thrift could not imagine who it could be that was in trouble.

He looked around, but saw no one.

Then he listened. The sound came from behind a large tree near by. He
walked over to the spot. And there sat--who do you suppose?

Little Gray Squirrel, crying into his maple-leaf handkerchief as
though his very heart would break!

"What is the matter, Gray Squirrel?" asked Father Thrift.

"Oh, Father Thrift," sobbed Little Gray Squirrel, "let me tell you
what some bad boys did to me!

"I live in the big old oak tree near the edge of the forest. I have a
nest in the old tree's trunk. There I live with my baby squirrels.
There, too, I have gathered and stored nuts for food.

"And now some boys have stolen all my nuts!

"Soon the cold days of winter will come. Then what shall I do for food
for my babies and myself?"

And the poor little squirrel cried until he almost choked, and fresh
tears ran down his cheeks.

Father Thrift looked angry. He said: "This is very bad. I am sorry to
hear all this, good Gray Squirrel. While I cannot give you back the
nuts which the boys stole, I think I can send some one to help you
gather more.

"There are still some nuts on the ground, and we'll help you to find
them."

Little Gray Squirrel thanked Father Thrift for his kind words. Then he
dried his tears and started for home.

And the queer little old man sat watching the bushy tail as it whisked
down the crooked path and out of sight.

Then all of a sudden he heard a sharp "Tap-tap-tap!"

Without even looking up Father Thrift knew who it was. "A friend in
need," he said to himself.

Then he called to the woodpecker that was doing the knocking. "I wish
to talk with you," he said.

Woodpecker flew down, and Father Thrift told him all about Little Gray
Squirrel.

"Oh, we will help him gather a fresh store of nuts," said Mr.
Woodpecker. "Indeed, we will help!" And he flew away.

Within a very short time a whole flock of woodpeckers was flying
toward Little Gray Squirrel's home.

Soon Little Gray Squirrel's troubles were over, for the woodpeckers
filled his winter storeroom full of the choicest nuts. Now he was sure
of having plenty to eat all winter for himself and his family. And how
thankful he was!

But that is not all.

When the woodpeckers were through filling the squirrel's storeroom
with nuts, did they stop?

No, indeed! One woodpecker who was older than the others got up on the
topmost branch of the tree and said:

"Dear brothers, do you realize now how foolish we have been all our
lives?

"In the summer we feed on bugs and beetles and ants and seeds.

"Then in the winter, because we know no better, some of us go South.
Some of us go hungry, and some of us die, because we cannot find
enough to eat.

"Why cannot we, too, store up nuts and have food for the winter as the
squirrels do?"

"The very thing!" cried the other woodpeckers.

So they all began gathering acorns and beechnuts and storing them in
the bark of the trees.

Some of the nuts they would drop beneath the bark of the tree. And
some they would drive with their strong bills into cracks and holes
which they found here and there.

The trees which were old and worm-eaten were, of course, the easiest
into which to drive the nuts. Knotholes, too, were good places in
which to store food.

When the woodpeckers had many, many nuts stored away, one of them
said:

"Isn't it strange that we didn't think of this before! We need not go
South to find a new home this winter. We can stay right here and still
have plenty to eat."

And that is what they did.

So, while the woodpeckers helped Little Gray Squirrel out of his
trouble, they helped themselves into the good habit of learning to
save. And they have not forgotten it to this day.




THE BUSY BEAVERS


One evening Father Thrift was sitting by the brook, looking into the
water. The bright silver moon made the night almost as light as day.
Everything was quiet, except for a faint ripple of the water.

Suddenly Father Thrift heard something go, "Splash-sh! splash-sh!
splash! splash!" almost beside him.

Then he heard a voice calling from the water.

"Father Thrift," it said, "you have never visited us. Won't you take
your canoe and come now?"

And Father Thrift, looking into the water, saw that it was Mr. Beaver
who was calling.

"Thank you, thank you, Mr. Beaver!" replied the queer little old man.
"I will accept your invitation with pleasure."

And soon the two were making their way through the water to the place
where the beavers were building their home.

And where do you suppose that was?

On a nice sunny hill? Or in the shade of the trees?

No, no! Instead, it was in the middle of a pond which the beavers
themselves had made by building a dam of mud and sticks.

The beavers' house was made of mud and sticks mixed with stones. Or,
rather, it was being made. The beavers were still working at it.

"My, my," said Father Thrift, "how very, very late you beavers work!
Don't you ever rest?

"I know you are very industrious. Nearly everybody knows that, as
there is a familiar saying among us that an industrious person works
like a beaver. But I never supposed that you worked all the time!"

"We don't," replied Mr. Beaver. "We work only at night. All of our
work is done then. And I am ashamed to tell you that there are some
beavers who do not wish to work at all."

"_So!_" exclaimed Father Thrift. "I am surprised at that. And do they
live here, too?"

"Oh, no," said Mr. Beaver. "We have no place for lazy beavers, or 'old
bachelors,' as we call them. Usually we cut their tails off and chase
them away."

"That is punishment enough," said Father Thrift. "Still, lazy folks
deserve no better. Wasting time is just as bad as wasting food, or
money, or anything else."

Then Father Thrift stopped to watch the interesting and wonderful ways
of the wise beavers.

Some of them dug mud out of the bottom of the creek.

Others cut sticks from bushes and trees with their big chisel-edged
teeth. By biting out chips, one by one, a beaver can easily cut down a
large tree.

The mud and sticks for their house and dam they carried against their
breasts as they swam, holding them there with their forefeet. Then
they would put the sticks in place and press the mud down.

Their tails they used only for swimming. But, then, those big, strong
tails make fine propellers.

"You are building a very large house, it seems to me," remarked Father
Thrift.

"Yes," replied Mr. Beaver. "But you must remember that several
families of beavers live in the different rooms of this house."

"Just so, just so," said the queer little old man. "I suppose that you
find your house comfortable. But isn't it rather damp?"

"In some parts, yes," admitted Mr. Beaver. "But in the center of our
house we have rooms above the water.

"Of course, as you know, we cannot climb trees like a squirrel.
Neither can we burrow like a cottontail rabbit. But in deep water we
are safe.

"We enter and leave our homes from beneath the water, unseen. And when
we are attacked by enemies we take to the water to save ourselves."

"I have been told that your food is chiefly the roots of the common
yellow water lily," said Father Thrift. "What do you do in the winter
when the pond is frozen and there are no lily roots to be had?"

"Oh," said Mr. Beaver, "we eat the bark of trees, too--mostly poplar,
birch, and willow. But, as the ice prevents us from getting to the
land in winter, we should not have even that to eat if we did not cut
a supply of sticks in the summer time.

"These we throw into the water opposite the doors of our houses and
leave them there for the winter, for bark is good beaver food."

Father Thrift nodded. But on his way home he could have been heard to
say: "Wise little animals! Always working. Always saving. Always
having."




THE GRAY FOXES AND THE RED FOXES


After Father Thrift came to the forest to live, one night each week
(except in bad or very cold weather) had been "story night."

On "story night" all the animals would meet in front of his cave to
hear and tell stories.

This night Gray Fox was to tell a story.

Gray Fox was a good story-teller, and so he always had a large
audience. Most of the animals were present to hear him.

And this is the story Gray Fox told:

       *       *       *       *       *

There was once a young fox who was very wasteful. He left half his
food on his plate. He spent all his pennies for candy. He broke his
playthings purposely, and tore his clothes needlessly. There was
really no end to his wastefulness.

This fox belonged to the family of Gray Foxes. And the Gray Foxes were
a prosperous nation.

They lived peaceably among themselves and with their neighbors, and
every one had plenty to eat, to wear, and to spend.

So no one paid much attention to Young Fox's wastefulness. Or if the
other foxes did pay attention to him, they rather imitated him, for he
_was_ a clever young fox.

Soon nearly all the young foxes grew wasteful. They all left half
their food on their plates. They all spent their pennies for candy.
They all broke their playthings purposely, and tore their clothes
needlessly. There was no end to their wastefulness.

And so things went from bad to worse.

But one day a messenger brought the Gray Foxes some bad news. The Red
Foxes were preparing to make war upon the Gray Foxes!

"Why make war upon us?" asked the Gray Foxes. "We are a peaceable
nation. We harm no one."

"True, true!" said Governor Gray Fox. "But remember, also, that we are
a prosperous nation. We are _too_ prosperous to please the Red Foxes.
We must prepare to defend ourselves."

And they did prepare. And then there was a long and bloody war between
the Gray Foxes and the Red Foxes.

The Gray Fox fathers and brothers, who should have been working in the
fields and mills and factories, were out killing the Red Fox fathers
and brothers.

And the Red Fox fathers and brothers, instead of working in their
fields and mills and factories, were out killing the Gray Fox fathers
and brothers.

But the foxes did not stop eating. And they did not stop wearing
clothes.

Just as many foxes as ever were eating food and wearing clothes. Yet
only about half as many were left at home to make the things to eat
and the clothes to wear. The rest of the foxes were away at war.

So, of course, there were only half as many things to eat and to wear
as there had been before. And because there were only half as many,
and every one wanted these, they cost twice as much.

Now it seemed as though the poor foxes wouldn't have money enough to
buy food and clothes. And they worried as to how they could get along.

But the rich foxes, like Young Fox and his friends, could still buy
all the things _they_ wanted, because they had plenty of money. They
bought more than they needed.

"This will never do!" declared Governor Gray Fox. "Everybody must eat,
and everybody must wear clothes.

"Hereafter every one will get an equal share of the food, and nothing
must be wasted. And clothes will cost just so much and no more."

The poor foxes said that that was fair enough, for they hadn't
anything to waste. But the rich foxes complained bitterly. They said
the Governor was trying to starve them.

Still, they had to do as the Governor said. And it was good for them
to do with less. It is true that the fat foxes lost their big
stomachs, but that made them look handsomer. It also made them feel
much better.

No one ever left anything on his plate now. No one spent his money
foolishly. No one broke his things purposely, or tore his clothes
needlessly. There was an end to all the wastefulness.

And when the war was over the Gray Foxes grew prosperous again. Only
this time there were no foxes as poor as there had been before the
war. Neither were there any quite so rich.

But every one had plenty. And because all shared fairly, they all
lived more happily.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Which shows," added Father Thrift, "that everything which happens is
for the best, and the world is a good place to live in, after all."




RED SQUIRREL AND BUNNY COTTONTAIL


The ground was covered deep with snow, and it was bitter cold in the
forest.

But Mr. Red Squirrel and his family were quite comfortable in their
cozy home.

Mr. Red Squirrel lived with his wife and three children in the hollow
of an old oak tree. They were a thrifty and industrious family.

They always had plenty to eat, besides something laid away for a rainy
day.

That is because Mr. Red Squirrel was very careful about little things,
and brought up his family to be the same.

Before the nuts were fully ripe, the squirrels would climb the trees,
gnaw the stems, and drop the nuts to the ground.

Then they would scamper down and gather them into neat piles. They
would eat some of the new nuts for breakfast, and put the rest away in
the granaries.

They worked hard all the summer and autumn, getting food for the
winter. And never a thing was wasted in Mr. Squirrel's house.

On this cold winter's night Mr. and Mrs. Squirrel and the three little
squirrels sat warm and snug in their home in the old oak tree.
Suddenly there came a tiny tap at the door.

It might have been the wind. Mrs. Squirrel was not sure. She listened.
The sound came again. Yes, some one certainly was knocking at their
door.

Who could it be, this bitter cold night?

Mr. Squirrel got up and opened the door. At first he saw no one.

"Who's there?" he called, in his pleasant, cheery voice.

"It is I, neighbor," answered a weak voice, sadly. "Please let me in!
I am cold and hungry!"

Mr. Squirrel opened the door wide, and said: "Yes, come in, come in.
It is a bitter cold night, to be sure. Come in and let me shut the
door. My tail is nearly frozen just from standing here."

Then there came hopping into the hollow of the tree trunk a rabbit.
Poor Bunny Cottontail, how miserable he did look!

His coat was all dirty and ragged. And his poor little tail hung down
behind instead of standing up straight and stiff, as a rabbit's tail
ought to do.

His ears drooped, and his whiskers were broken and limp. He had
rheumatism in one hind leg, and his eyes, which should have been as
bright as Mr. Squirrel's, were dull and dim.

Altogether he looked as shabby and sad as a bunny could look--not at
all like a respectable, well-brought-up rabbit.

Mr. Squirrel hastened to put poor Bunny into the warmest corner of the
hollow. And Mrs. Squirrel brought him some food, which he ate eagerly.

The little squirrels were so astonished at the rabbit's appearance
that they did not know what to make of him.

When Bunny was warm and rested, Mrs. Squirrel sent her little ones to
bed.

Then she and Mr. Squirrel began to try to find out what had happened
to make their poor neighbor so forlorn.

"How could I help it?" he cried mournfully. "I did not know that it
would be so cold, nor that the snow would be so deep that I should not
be able to get a bit of winter cabbage to eat.

"I am sure I am willing to work. I would take any trouble, but it is
not a bit of use. Indeed, Neighbor Squirrel, I do not see how you have
managed."

And he looked enviously around the neat, warm little nest.

"It was very simple," replied Mr. Squirrel, gravely. "We all helped
and put away part of everything we found. If we found six nuts, we put
away at least three in our storeroom. And nuts and acorns were very
plentiful this autumn.

"So, though the winter is very hard, we shall have plenty. We have
plenty for a friend, too. So eat as much as you will, neighbor, and
don't spare the loaf."

It was very kind of Mr. Squirrel, but he could not help the poor
rabbit much.

Bunny had been such an idle, wandering fellow that he could not be
content to stay with Mr. and Mrs. Squirrel quietly and help to do the
work of their little home. So in a few days he wandered away.

As he shivered in the cold and tried to find enough to eat, he often
wished that he had been as wise and as thrifty as the Squirrel family.

And the Squirrel family, being as kind-hearted as they were thrifty,
often thought of the poor rabbit with pity. They wondered how he was
getting on, but they never heard of him again.




SHAGGY BEAR'S MISTAKE


Father Thrift was carrying in wood for his fire. It had been a long
and hard winter.

Suddenly he heard footsteps in the snow behind him. He looked around.
And there--would you believe it!--stood his old friend, Shaggy Bear.

Shaggy was as thin as a shadow, and his teeth chattered with the cold.

"My, my, but you are out early this year!" exclaimed Father Thrift.
"Come in and warm yourself by the fire."

Shaggy needed no coaxing. He was so cold that even his voice had
frozen in his throat! At least he couldn't speak a word until he grew
warm.

And the way that bear snuggled up to Father Thrift's fire was comical
to see!

At last he managed to say: "Father Thrift, I shouldn't know this place
if I had not lived here so long. You have a door on the cave, and two
windows. And you have chairs and a table, and--and two beds.

"Why have you two beds, Father Thrift?"

"One is for company," answered the queer little old man.

"If you had just one more bed, I should say this was the House of the
Three Bears."

And Shaggy laughed at his little joke. (Or perhaps the good meal which
Father Thrift had prepared for him tickled his stomach.)

"Where have you been all winter?" asked Father Thrift.

"When the cold days came," said the bear, "I crawled into my cave in
the rocks and curled myself up into a big ball. There I meant to stay
until the warm days of spring.

"The snow made a door to my cave, and I intended to sleep all winter
long.

"Then the wind swept the snow away from my door and I awoke and looked
about. I thought that spring had come.

"And that is where I made my mistake. I should have gone to sleep
again. But I was hungry, having had nothing to eat all winter. So I
crawled out.

"The roots and the berries are still asleep under the snow. The fish
are under the ice. There is nothing for me to do but return to my cave
and go back to sleep."

"You must not do that," said Father Thrift. "That would be wasting
time. And time is the most precious thing we have."

"Is it?" the bear asked in surprise.

"Indeed it is!" replied Father Thrift. "We may lose wealth, but by
hard work and saving we may win it back.

"We may lose health, and with care and medicine restore it. But time
that is lost is gone forever."

The bear listened to Father Thrift's wise talk, but he shivered and
said: "Still, I am cold; and I can find no food to eat."

"I have a warm fire," said Father Thrift. "And I have food enough for
us both, and to spare. I will share with you if you will help me with
my work."

"That I will, gladly!" cried Shaggy, who was still smacking his lips
over the fine dinner he had eaten. "But how does it happen that you
have food, when the ground has been frozen so long?"

"When you learn to look ahead," replied Father Thrift, "you will find
that easy enough.

"In the warm days I prepare for the cold days which I know are coming.
I raise my crops. I gather berries and plums, and preserve them. The
apples and the nuts will keep as they are.

"So, you see, instead of letting go to waste what I cannot use when
food is plentiful, I save it for the days when food is scarce."

"Then do you rest all winter?" asked the bear.

"No!" said Father Thrift. "In the winter many things are waiting to be
done. Then I make my clothes, shoes, furniture, tools, and other
things."

"What are you making now?" questioned the bear, as Father Thrift
whittled pieces of wood with his knife.

"These will be wooden spouts," answered Father Thrift. "You like sweet
things--honey, for instance."

Father Thrift smiled. Do you know why?

"Well, maple sirup and maple sugar are about as sweet as honey. These
spouts will help us get all we want of both."

"Will they?" cried Shaggy eagerly. "How?"

"The maple trees, too," Father Thrift told him, "have been sleeping
all winter. Most of the sap has been down in their roots. In the early
spring it travels upward into the trunk and branches and the trees
awake.

"The maple tree does not need all its sap. It is willing to give some
of it to us. And when you have maple sirup you won't have to steal
honey from the bees."

This pleased Shaggy so much that he stood up on his hind legs and
danced a bear dance. How Father Thrift laughed!




THE SWEETEST THING IN THE FOREST


Father Thrift spent the next few days in making wooden pails, in which
to gather the maple sap.

What a lot of measuring and sawing and fitting and finishing it takes
to make a few pails!

Shaggy Bear helped as much as he could. But bears are _such_ clumsy
things!

Finally one day Father Thrift said to Shaggy: "Now everything is
ready. We have our spouts with which to draw the sap from the trees.
And we have the wooden pails and some earthen crocks I made from clay
last summer, in which to gather it.

"There is a large iron kettle we will use for boiling the sap down
into sirup and sugar.

"To-morrow we will tap our trees."

"Why to-morrow?" asked the bear. "That seems too long to wait. Why not
to-day?"

"Because," replied Father Thrift, "everything depends on time. There
isn't time enough left to-day. To-morrow we will start work real
early. And to get up early to-morrow we must get to bed early
to-night."

"I don't see how I shall be able to sleep at all," grumbled the bear.

But in a few moments he was fast asleep where he sat.

He was a funny fellow!

Still, Father Thrift did not mind. He liked the quiet. When it was
quiet he could think. In that he was quite different from many people,
who like only to talk.

And he thought to himself: "Suppose that each person wastes one hour a
day. A hundred days, a hundred hours. Multiply that by the number of
people in the world--"

But the figures were too large even for Father Thrift to count up.

"If every one would use that hour each day in reading a good book, or
in thinking, or in doing something else that is useful, how much
better the world would be in another hundred years!"

Father Thrift sat and thought for a whole hour.

Then he waked the bear and each went to his own bed to rest for the
night.

What a funny sight it was--a man and a bear sleeping side by side in
the same room!

Early the next morning Father Thrift and the bear went to the maple
grove to tap their trees.

Father Thrift bored holes in the tree trunks. Then he pounded a little
spout into each hole for the sap to run through.

As they had no handles on their pails and crocks, they could not hang
them on the spouts. Instead they set them down in the snow under the
spouts.

The sun was getting warm, and was drawing up the sap from the roots of
the tree into its branches. Soon you could hear it drip, drip,
dripping into the pails and the crocks.

Shaggy Bear was too astonished to talk. He put out his paw, and a
great drop of shining yellow maple sap fell on it. Then he licked his
paw. Then he grunted, a funny bear grunt of surprise and pleasure.

_Mmmmmm!_ It was good! It was sweet, truly. And what a delicious
flavor it had!

The bear put out his paw again and again. And how he did lick the sap
off it! My, oh, _my_! it was sweet! Not even the honey of the bee
tasted so good. It was like nothing else in the whole forest.

Meanwhile Father Thrift was arranging his kettle and pans and building
a fire.

"Now let us pour all the sap into one pail," he said, "and perhaps we
shall have enough to start boiling."

"Oh, but that may spoil it!" cried Shaggy Bear.

"The sap is made sweeter by boiling," said Father Thrift. But the bear
did not see how that could be.

When the sap began to boil, Father Thrift told Shaggy to stir it, so
that it would not burn.

Suddenly the bear began jumping about and crying: "Father Thrift, come
here, come here!"

Father Thrift ran over to see what had happened.

Shaggy was all excitement.

"Look!" he cried. "Look in the kettle! We had much there. Now we have
little. I told you the fire would spoil it!"

"No," replied Father Thrift, smilingly, "the fire has not spoiled
anything. When the sap boils, the water in it goes away in steam. And
the longer it boils, the more the water goes away.

"This time we will not let it boil so very long, and then we shall
have sirup. But the next kettle of sap we will boil longer and then we
shall have maple sugar."

When the sirup grew thick, Father Thrift said, "Taste!" And the bear
tasted.

"Oh, Father Thrift," he cried in delight, "it is the best thing I have
ever tasted! Truly, the boiling improves it."

Then when the maple sugar was done, Father Thrift called Shaggy.

"Taste _this_," he said.

Ah, how good it was! Nothing like it had ever gone into Shaggy Bear's
mouth before. Never had he tasted such sweetness.

And, oh, what a wonderful meal they had that night! Father Thrift made
golden corn cakes, and he and Shaggy ate the hot cakes with fresh
maple sirup poured over them.

       *       *       *       *       *

The bear grew thoughtful after supper.

"Now I know why I used to get into so much trouble," he said. "I have
had too much idle time on my hands.

"After this I will work hard and learn. I--I think I could help you a
lot, Father Thrift. Will--you--let--me--stay--if--I--do?"

"I shall be glad to have you stay, always," said Father Thrift.

And the bear was so overjoyed at what Father Thrift said that he
cried.




ROBINS, CROWS, AND BLACKBIRDS


A soft little breeze was blowing. It was warm, and it had in it the
smell of green things growing--trees, and buds, and grass, and
flowers.

Little birds were singing. And they had joy and gladness in their
voices. And the colors of the rainbow were in their feathers.

Little brooks were flowing--flowing and growing into rivers. They
sparkled in the merry sunshine, and their laughter could be heard
everywhere they went.

The whole forest was glad. Why?

Because it was spring, merry spring. And spring is the gladdest,
happiest time of all the year.

Father Thrift was plowing his garden and Shaggy Bear was helping him.

And do you know how they worked together?

Father Thrift held the handles of the plow and Shaggy pulled it. He
was the horse. A funnier sight you have never seen!

The ground was hard, so that no seed could grow in it. Father Thrift
turned the earth over with his plow. This loosened the soil and made
it soft.

The robins followed the plow and found nice large angleworms for their
breakfast. Then they sang this song:

    Cheerily cheer-up! Cheerily cheer-up!
      Cheerily cheer, we're glad you're here,
    Little fat worms. Oh, cheerily cheer-up,
      Cheerily cheer, we're glad you're here!

But the little fat worms only turned and squirmed. They sang no song
at all.

The crows and the blackbirds followed Father Thrift, too. They ate the
grub worms and the beetles and other insects which they found.

Then, when the ground was ready, Father Thrift and Shaggy Bear planted
the seeds.

The robins did not follow them now.

But the crows and the blackbirds did. And do you know what they were
doing?

They were eating the seeds almost as fast as Father Thrift and Shaggy
dropped them into the ground.

Father Thrift stopped in his work.

"Crows and blackbirds," he said, "you must not do that."

"Why?" asked one old crow. "We always have done it."

"Yes, I know you have," replied Father Thrift. "And that is what has
given you such a bad name with the farmer.

"By eating the seed or pulling up sprouting corn you spoil the crop.
And so you have less food for yourselves in the end."

"How is that?" asked Cousin Blackbird.

"Well," explained Father Thrift, "every grain of corn you eat now
would make ears of corn if you let it stay in the ground to grow.

"And of every ear of corn grown some kernels are left in the field in
the shocking. So that for every kernel not eaten now you would have
many kernels in the autumn.

"Besides, if you will keep the bad bugs and worms and grasshoppers out
of my garden, I promise to give you every tenth ear of all the corn I
grow."

Then the crows got together. And all you could hear from them was a
loud "Caw, caw, caw!"

But they must have agreed that Father Thrift's proposal was a fair
one. The old crow spoke for all the crows. He said:

"We will do as you ask, Father Thrift. We wish all farmers were as
reasonable with us.

"We help the farmer, but we get no credit for it. We eat many, many
grasshoppers and beetles and worms and caterpillars and weevils every
year.

"These would be at work destroying the farmer's crops if we did not
eat them. And, for all that, the farmer is always chasing and killing
us."

"No," said Father Thrift, "the farmer does not dislike you for the
good you do. He dislikes you for the harm you do. Your bad habits make
you unpopular. Why don't you give them up?"

"Caw, caw, caw!" cried all the crows. I suppose they meant, "Yes, yes,
yes."

But whether or not they meant what they said I don't know.

As for the blackbirds, whatever was agreeable to the crows was
satisfactory to them. And they flew away singing, "Conk-err-ee!
Conk-err-ee!"

And as Father Thrift and Shaggy Bear sat down under a tree to rest,
Mr. Robin sang his song from the topmost bough. It was like this:

    Cheerily cheer-up! Cheerily cheer-up!
      Cheerily cheer, five of us here;
    Mother and me, and babies three. Cheer up,
      Cheerily cheer, we're happy here.

You see, Mr. Robin's English was not perfect, but he was too happy to
be careful.




THE LITTLE RAINDROPS


Every seventh day Father Thrift rested. To-day was Sunday, the seventh
day.

Father Thrift, as usual, arose just as the gray clouds were bidding
the earth good-by.

How that queer little old man did enjoy those summer mornings!

Not many people get up early enough to know what they are like.

It is then that the birds sing for Father Sun to awake. And the chorus
of thanksgiving which arises from the woods and the fields is enough
to gladden any one's heart.

Every boy and girl should learn to know these beautiful morning hours.

But this morning the dark clouds lingered longer than usual. That was
because they had brought the raindrops from their home in the sky to
visit the earth below.

The flowers lifted their grateful heads to greet the raindrops.

The thirsty roots under the ground were made glad by them. And so were
the leaves and the buds and all the growing green things above the
ground.

The frogs jumped about in their glee and croaked joyfully, "Oh, what
fun we have!"

The brook rushed rejoicing to the river, and the river ran to the sea.
And both sang on their way.

But the birds and the squirrels were not so happy when the raindrops
came tumbling down from the sky. They hid in their nests and under the
leaves of the trees and waited for them to go away.

Even Shaggy Bear did not like the rain. He hid in the cave, to keep
his fur dry.

Now the time was drawing near when most people were waking--that is,
in the cities. The farmer has learned to know the beautiful early
hours of the morning.

"Let us play," cried a tiny raindrop to the others. "Let us play and
stay here always. For the earth is a beautiful place."

But the older and wiser raindrops trickled away and hid almost
anywhere they could.

Some of them hid in Father Thrift's garden. Some of them jumped into
the brook.

They knew they were sent down to the earth to do some good, and not to
spend their time in playing. They had plenty of time in the sky for
play.

So if they wished to stay on the earth they must work.

The little raindrops that hid in Father Thrift's garden would help to
make the plants grow.

Those that jumped into the brook would help to give a good cool drink
to all who were thirsty.

Then Father Sun came out from behind the gray clouds.

"Come, little raindrops, down on earth," he said. "Those of you that
are not busy, or are not needed there, must come home. You have
important work to do elsewhere."

And, like the good father that he was, he gathered up all that he
could find and put them into pretty white and blue boats. And the wind
gently sailed them across the sky.

Then the Rain Fairies and the Sun Fairies joined hands until they made
a beautiful arch from earth to heaven.

We call this arch the rainbow. The gay colors are the pretty dresses
of the fairies.

Now the birds of the forest came forth from their nests. They
fluttered their little wings and sent the raindrops which had rested
on them down to the flowers and the grasses.

Then they flew into the tree tops, where Father Sun could see them.
And, as though to make up for lost time, they sang more sweetly than
they did on clear days.

How their songs gladdened the forest!

Father Thrift sat on a log to listen to that orchestra of a thousand
throats trilling from the tree tops.

And Shaggy Bear came out from the cave and sat down beside him.

"A pretty world it would be without the birds!" said Father Thrift.

"How dull it would be without their colors! The rainbow cannot match
them.

"How cheerless it would be without their song! Man cannot equal it."

And you may be sure that Father Thrift and Shaggy Bear did not forget
the birds in their prayers that night.




TROUBLE IN THE FOREST


The next day was Monday, the first of July. Father Thrift turned the
leaf of his homemade calendar. Then he and Shaggy Bear went out into
the garden to work.

All of a sudden they heard such a commotion! They looked up and saw a
great flock of birds flying toward them.

There were robins and bluebirds and kingbirds and bobolinks and brown
thrashers and catbirds and meadow larks and woodpeckers and wrens, and
all the other birds of the forest.

Did they come to sing for Father Thrift because it was the first of
July?

No, not one of the birds was singing now. They were chattering and
crying, but you could not make out what the fuss was all about.

To Father Thrift and Shaggy it sounded something like this:

    Charr, charr, caw, caw, churr, churr, chee, chee,
    Peenk, peenk, quit, quit, chuck, chuck, whee, whee,
    Tzip, tzip, thsee, thsee, conk-err-ee, whack,
    Jay, jay, mew, mew, whip, chip, crack, tchack,
                R-r-r-r-r-r-r!!

"R-r-r-r-r-r-r" meant, "We're angry. Next time we will fight them."

Now the woodpeckers drummed for quiet: "Rrr-runk, tunk, tunk!"

Then Mr. Robin walked up to Father Thrift. He said, "Oh, Father
Thrift, we have come to tell you that the boys have been very mean to
us. Let me tell you what they did to us.

"While Mrs. Robin and I were away they climbed up into the tree where
we had built our nest and stole our eggs." And there were tears in
his bright eyes.

Then Mr. Bluebird came. He was a pretty little fellow, and mannerly
too. "Oh, Father Thrift," he said, "let me tell you what the boys did
to me.

"My nest was in a hole in your apple tree. The boys tore the green
apples off the tree and threw them all about. They stuffed them into
the hole where my nest was and now I have no home.

"They are not afraid even of you."

Then Mr. Kingbird came up. He said: "What Cousin Bluebird has just
told you is true. One of the apples struck my nest and knocked it
down.

"There were four speckled eggs in it. I have lost not only my home but
my pretty eggs with it. Is that right, Father Thrift?"

And sadness and sorrow were in his voice.

Just then Brown Thrasher came along. He was hopping on one foot. "Oh,
Father Thrift," he said, "look what has happened to me! I was harming
no one. I was just singing a song, when I was hit in the leg."

"And pretty are the songs you can sing," said Father Thrift. "Many,
many times have I been made happy by your sweet and cheerful notes.
But who was it that hurt you?"

"The boys," replied Brown Thrasher. "They hit me with a stone from
their sling shot and broke my leg."

Now Mrs. Bobolink came up. "Oh, Father Thrift," she said, sobbing,
"hear me!

"While I put our house in order Mr. Bobolink would stand guard to see
that no enemies came near us.

"And he would sing to me at the same time. Such sweet songs as he
could sing! I think no other bird could equal him.

"We, too, had some eggs in our nest. And we were happy. Yesterday Mr.
Bobolink was perched on the tip of a bough, singing, when suddenly he
fell to the ground.

"I flew to see what the trouble was. And do you know what had
happened?

"He was dead. He had been hit on the head with a stone. Not far away I
saw the boys who killed him.

"To-day we dug a grave and buried him under his favorite tree." And
poor Mrs. Bobolink cried harder than ever.

Then Father and Mother Meadow Lark came up. "Oh, Father Thrift," they
cried, "listen to what has happened to us!

"We had four little children in a nest in the field. The nest was
covered over with grasses. We thought it perfectly safe.

"But while we were away getting food for our little ones, some one
stole them all."

And the Meadow Larks wept as though their hearts would break.

"It must have been the boys!" chorused all the birds.

Father Thrift looked very angry.

"All this is very sad," he said. "I am sorry indeed to hear it. But,
little friends, go home and make the best of things for the present.

"Shaggy Bear and I will find some way to help you."

Then the birds flew away. And they made such a noise that the clouds
trembled in the sky.




TWO BAD BOYS


For a while neither Father Thrift nor the bear spoke.

Then the queer little old man said:

"Those boys must be punished, Shaggy. They must be taught a lesson.
Killing birds is no joke.

"To-morrow morning take your lunch with you and go to the north edge
of the forest. There you will find a crooked road that is little
traveled.

"I believe that this is the road over which the boys came. They will
come again.

"Hide yourself behind a tree and watch for them. And when you catch
them bring them to me."

"Yes, yes," said Shaggy, "I certainly will."

So early the next morning Father Thrift packed the bear's lunch and
off Shaggy started for the north edge of the forest.

But he returned late that night, tired and cross, without the boys.

The same thing happened the next day, and the next.

Shaggy was so discouraged by this time that he thought it of no use to
try again.

But Father Thrift said: "Go just this once more. And if you do not
have better luck to-day you need not go again."

So Shaggy went for the fourth time.

And, as it happened, he did have better luck.

When he reached the edge of the forest he seated himself beside a
large tree near the road, to watch. But the kind breeze was blowing so
softly that he soon fell asleep.

And as he slept he dreamed a dream--a very strange sort of dream.

He dreamed he was the king of Honeybee Land. All of his subjects were
honeybees, and there were exactly one million of them.

In another month there would be half a million more of them.

If he had so much honey now, think how much more he would have when
the other half million honeybees started to gather it!

Now all that he had to do was to eat the honey as fast as the
honeybees made it.

That seemed easy enough. _Um-m_, how he loved that honey!

But soon he found out that bees are very busy and very thrifty little
things.

Oh, how very, _very_ busy they kept him trying to eat all the honey
they made!

Each day his stomach was getting larger and larger. How much farther
could it stretch?

Then, "Whizz!" he woke up with a start.

"I thought so! I thought so!" he said to himself, as he placed his
paws on his stomach and rolled up his eyes.

But, no, his stomach hadn't exploded at all. He could feel that.

Besides, there was an arrow lying right beside him. The arrow must
have hit him.

Just then he happened to remember where he was.

"The boys!" he said to himself. "The boys! In mischief, with a bow and
arrows."

He looked around. And there they were, sitting under a tree not a
hundred feet away from him!

He could see a bow and arrows on the ground beside them. But what were
they doing?

They were holding something in their hands. First they would look at
it, then they would blow on it. Then they would look again and blow
again.

The bear crept closer. Everything was clear to him now! The boys had
killed a bird and they were trying to find the spot where the arrow
had struck it.

So interested were they in this that they did not notice the bear
stealing up behind them.

When he got right over them he gave a dreadful growl: "Gr-r-r-r!"

It was very loud and very fierce.

"Why did you kill that bird?" he asked. "I have a good mind to eat you
alive." And he gave another fierce growl.

The boys acted like frightened rabbits. They were too astonished to
speak.

The bear picked up the bow and arrows.

"One, attention!" he commanded. "Two, get ready! Three, go!"

The boys took to the path which led toward their homes. But the bear
called them back.

"You don't understand," he said. "Now, go the other way. To-night you
must report to Father Thrift. Gr-r-r-r! And not another word."

This last command must have been a bear joke, for the boys had not
uttered a word.

Then away they all started--the boys as Shaggy's prisoners--for the
cave in the forest.




THE BOYS AND THE BIRDS


The boys spent an uncomfortable night in Father Thrift's cave.

Half the time they could not sleep. And, worse still, the other half
they dreamed such dreadful dreams!

But the next morning, after they had had breakfast with Father Thrift
and Shaggy Bear, the boys felt much better.

Still, they had a feeling that something terrible was about to happen
to them. How they longed to go home!

Then the queer little old man seated himself on a log just outside the
door of the cave.

"Shaggy Bear," he said, "go, tell Jenny Wren to ask all the birds of
the forest to come here."

Soon all the birds had come. And, oh! what excitement there was when
they saw the boys!

"Shoot them with an arrow! Hit them with a stone! Kill them!" the
angry little creatures cried.

Father Thrift lifted his hand for order.

When things were quiet, and the birds had gathered around him, the
queer little old man stood up. In a soft and somewhat sad voice he
said to the birds:

"My friends, let us act calmly and justly. Let us consider well before
we decide on the punishment which these boys should receive if they
are found guilty."

"But," protested Mr. Robin, "they climbed into our tree and stole our
eggs."

"They ruined my home," cried Cousin Bluebird, "and they wasted your
apples in doing it!"

"Yes, and they knocked down my nest and broke all the eggs in it,"
added Mr. Kingbird.

"They broke my leg with a stone from a sling shot," piped Brown
Thrasher.

"And they killed my poor husband," cried Mrs. Bobolink.

"They stole our four little children," sobbed the Meadow Larks.

"And they shot a bird with an arrow yesterday," added Shaggy Bear.
"Here is the bird. Here, too, are the bow and the arrow." And he
handed them all to Father Thrift.

"Why, they've shot my cousin, Blackbird!" cried the Crow, who had been
quiet up to now. "I have a good mind to bite off their noses and
scratch out their eyes."

"R-r-r-r-r-r! Charr! charr! charr!" All the birds became very much
excited. They screamed and fluttered their wings, and their eyes shone
with anger.

The boys were badly frightened. But Father Thrift quickly restored
order.

He said: "Let us first hear what the boys have to say. We will ask
them a few questions."

He faced the boys. "Did you do what the birds say you did?" he asked.

The boys hung their heads in shame.

Then one of them answered, after a pause, "I guess so."

"_Why_ did you do it?" asked Father Thrift.

"Well," replied the other boy, "most of the birds are no good, anyway.
They just eat everything we plant."

"What of yours have they eaten?" asked Father Thrift.

"The robins have been stealing our cherries," said the boy, "until we
have hardly any left for ourselves.

"The bluebirds eat our berries and grapes.

"The kingbirds eat not only our fruit, but our honeybees as well.

"The brown thrashers eat our raspberries and currants, while whole
flocks of bobolinks get their food from our oat fields.

"The meadow larks eat our grain.

"And as for the blackbirds and crows, they are the worst thieves in
the world. They even pull up our sprouting grain.

"So why shouldn't we kill the birds? They are our enemies, and they
do nothing but harm.

"And, besides, we haven't killed more than a dozen of them. Who would
miss a dozen in a world so full of birds?"

By this time most of the birds were quivering with anger.

And they cried again: "Shoot them with an arrow! Hit them with a
stone! Kill them!

"Who would miss two in a world so full of boys?"

"Listen, my friends," said Father Thrift. "I agree with you that the
boys deserve to be treated in the same way that they have treated you.
They have been cruel.

"Still, let us not act in haste or anger. Let us think matters over
well. Perhaps we shall find that some wrong has been done on both
sides.

"Go, now, and return at two o'clock. We will decide then what it is
best to do."




INSECTS AND WORMS


Long before two o'clock that afternoon the birds returned to their
place in front of Father Thrift's cave.

Some of them sat on the ground, some on the low branches of the trees,
and others in the bushes.

Now and again Shaggy Bear came out to tell some bird that Father
Thrift wished to speak with him.

Evidently important things were going on within the cave. But what?

Oh, how the time dragged to those waiting birds! Would two o'clock
never come?

At last the cave door opened again, and Shaggy Bear came out with his
prisoners.

Shaggy was the sheriff, and his business was to take care that the
boys did not run away.

Hardly were they seated when Father Thrift came out of the cave.

In one hand he carried a roll of paper, and with the other he adjusted
the spectacles on his nose. He looked just like the judge he was
supposed to be.

As in a regular courtroom, every one straightened up and was all
attention when the judge came.

The queer little old man seated himself on the stump of a tree.

Before him stood a high bench or table, made of rough boards. On this
he spread out his paper.

Then, turning toward Shaggy Bear, he said, "The sheriff and the
prisoners will please step forward."

And as they stood before him, Father Thrift read to the boys the
court's decision.

"The one who sins against the birds," the decision ran, "sins against
man's best friends.

"If we destroyed the birds, we ourselves could not live. Within a few
years there would be so many insects and worms that crops could not be
raised and plants could not grow. The bugs and the caterpillars would
eat all the leaves off the trees, while the worms would destroy the
roots.

"The flies and other harmful insects would kill the cattle. And then
they would carry sickness and disease among us.

"Why, the grasshoppers would dance on our very tables, while the
crickets sat on the dishes and played tunes!

"The ants would use our kitchens for parade grounds, and the worms
would crawl under our feet, in our houses.

"Yet you said that the birds were your enemies, and that they do only
harm.

"You complained of the robins and the bluebirds; the kingbirds and the
brown thrashers; the bobolinks and the meadow larks; the crows and the
blackbirds.

"So I have taken pains to look into the habits of each of these.

"The robin, I find, works during the whole season to make it possible
for the farmer to raise his crops. He is a natural enemy of bugs and
worms.

"He gets no pay for this work and asks for none. And the only reason
he eats your cherries is because you have destroyed the wild fruit
trees and berry bushes that used to grow by the roadside. Plant them
there again and the robin, and all the other birds too, will spare
your fruit.

"The bluebird catches the bad bugs and grasshoppers and beetles and
spiders and caterpillars in your orchard. And he very rarely takes
even a bite of your berries or grapes.

"The kingbird is a fine flycatcher and he does much good. Sometimes he
does eat a honeybee, it is true, but it must be because he mistakes it
for a large fly.

"The brown thrasher makes his home in the swamps and groves. He does
eat some raspberries and currants, in addition to the harmful insects
he devours, but nearly all of these must be wild ones.

"The few oats the bobolinks eat you could never miss, because these
birds feed mostly on insects and the seeds of useless plants.

"The meadow lark saves thousands of dollars every year on the hay
crop. He builds his nest on the ground in the meadow and feeds himself
and his large family on the crickets and grasshoppers he finds there.

"The crow and the blackbird, I know, eat some of your corn. But they
will not touch the seed corn if you put coal tar on it.

"Both of these birds do a great deal of good, for which they get no
credit. In the spring they follow the plow in search of large grub
worms, of which they are very fond. They also eat grasshoppers, and
weevils, and caterpillars.

"All of which goes to prove that the more birds we have, the fewer
bugs there are, to bother us. And the fewer bugs there are, the more
food we have.

"Therefore, I find that you two boys are guilty of a great wrong. Not
only have you killed the farmer's most valuable friends, but you have
destroyed food as well.

"Your punishment will be one year in prison for every bird that you
have killed."

At this the boys almost dropped to the ground, they were so badly
frightened.

"Oh, Father Thrift," they cried, "please don't put us in prison! We
have learned a lesson, and we promise never to kill another bird if
you will only let us go."

"My friends, what do _you_ think?" asked Father Thrift, turning to the
birds.

The hearts of the birds softened at the sight of the boys' distress.
And they said, "Give them another chance, Father Thrift."

"But theirs is a serious offense," Father Thrift said gravely.

Then he turned toward the boys.

"I will release you on one condition," he said, "and that is that you
will henceforth be kind to all harmless living creatures, and protect
them from cruel usage.

"Also, that you will ask all the other boys, and their fathers as
well, to do the same.

"Build bird houses for your feathered friends and encourage them to
come to your villages and farms.

"In the end you will profit greatly by it."

"We promise to do that," the boys agreed eagerly.

"Now Shaggy Bear will help you to find your way out of the forest,"
said Father Thrift.

"Your bow and arrows I shall keep, for you will never want them again.

"And when you get home, tell your fathers and mothers, your
grandfathers and grandmothers, your brothers and sisters, and the rest
of my friends in the town, that Father Thrift sends them his best
regards."

Then the boys said good-by, and they wasted no time in going.




AFTER MANY DAYS


The whole town was searching for the two missing boys. No one could
imagine what had happened to them.

"We shall never see them again!" sobbed their mothers. But they did
see them.

That very day, when the little birds had gone to sleep in their nests,
and the crickets chirped by the roadside, while night and the stars
looked down upon the earth, the two tired and hungry boys appeared.

Their mothers and fathers were overjoyed at their safe return.

All the townspeople crowded about them.

But the people could hardly believe the strange story they told.

"Father Thrift! Father Thrift!" they cried. "Why, it cannot be!"

For this was none other than the quaint old town in which the queer
little old man had lived for so many years.

"Upon our word and honor!" said the boys earnestly. "See, we cross our
hearts."

And they did.

This seemed to satisfy most of the villagers that the boys were
telling the truth.

"Still, the forest is dense with trees and brush," said one old man,
shaking his head doubtfully. "And it is alive with wild and dangerous
animals.

"Not one of _us_ has ever dared to go beyond the edge of _that_
forest. How could Father Thrift live there?"

"Let us not doubt," said another old man. "We had better follow the
advice which has been sent us.

"Have we not suffered since Father Thrift left us because we would not
take his advice?

"We did not appreciate him when he was here. We have learned to
appreciate him since he went away."

So the wonderful story was told and retold for miles and miles around.
And Father Thrift's good advice was taken to heart.

And the birds came by hundreds to live in the neighborhood.

The crops grew better each year.

And the people felt happier.

Then they pondered the things which Father Thrift had taught them. And
they did again as they had done when he was with them.

They lived simply, spent wisely, and wasted nothing.

And the quaint old town and the country around it grew prosperous, as
in the days of old.

Then after many days the people said:

"We must enter the wood at all costs--even at the risk of our lives.

"We must find good Father Thrift and do him honor."

So they went down the crooked road that led to the forest and went in.
The two boys led the way.

They heard the birds singing in the trees.

They saw the squirrels leaping and running.

They heard the ripple of the silvery brook.

They breathed the perfume of the pine trees and the firs.

They traced the footprints of bears, and rabbits, and deer.

Every little thing interested them now.

They gazed at the tender blue sky above. Never before had it looked so
beautiful.

Never had the grass seemed so fresh and sweet and green.

Nor had the flowers ever seemed so richly colored and so sweetly
scented.

Truly, the forest was a glorious place!

And nowhere--nowhere did they find the dreadful animals which they had
lived to fear these many years.

But they found a cave, a very strange sort of cave. It had two windows
and a door.

Inside were two beds and two chairs, and a table and a fireplace.

On the wall hung a home-made calendar.

Just outside the door was a high bench or table, and back of it stood
a tree stump.

"This is the place where Father Thrift lived," said the boys. "How
well we remember it!" But Father Thrift was not there now. The place
was vacant.

"The queer little old man must have gone to live in the beautiful,
happy, sunny land of which he often talked," said one of the men. And
the others agreed with him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Still stands the cave in the forest. People from miles and miles away
visit it.

The guide tells them the wonderful story of Father Thrift and his
animal friends. And it seems that with each retelling the story grows
more and still more wonderful.

And there is a bird that lives in the wood which on moonlight nights,
whether he sits on a branch, or hops on the ground, or flies about, is
always heard whistling, "Fa-ther Thrift! Fa-ther Thrift!"

Many people misunderstand and think that he is saying,
"Whip-poor-will! Whip-poor-will!"

But why any one should wish to whip any one else I do not know. For
the world is such a happy place.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FATHER THRIFT AND HIS ANIMAL
FRIENDS***


******* This file should be named 43287.txt or 43287.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/4/3/2/8/43287



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of Hyld og Humle, by Sophie Breum

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Hyld og Humle
       Fortællinger

Author: Sophie Breum

Release Date: July 24, 2013 [EBook #43290]

Language: Danish


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HYLD OG HUMLE ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from scanned
images of public domain material from the Google Print
project.)





Afskriverens bemærkninger: Åbenlyse trykfejl er rettet i denne
e-bog, men forfatterens stavning er for øvrigt bevaret.
_Understreg_ er brugt til at gengive s p a t i e r e t tekst.




SOPHIE BREUM

HYLD OG HUMLE

FORTÆLLINGER

KØBENHAVN
DET NORDISKE FORLAG
BOGFORLAGET: ERNST BOJESEN
1900


_Oplag: 1200 Ekspl._

KØBENHAVN. -- NIELSEN & LYDICHE.




INDHOLD.


                                  Side

MØDRE                                7

DØDEN OG BRÆNDEHUGGEREN             43

KAMMERJUNKEREN                      48

DEN DRISTIGE                        61

KAPTAJNENS DATTER                   74

TO SØSTRE                          121

REKREATION                         158

DEN HØJE MAND                      168

EN KÆRLIGHEDSHISTORIE              178




MØDRE.


Den unge Frue lod Romanen synke ned paa sit Skød og gabede træt.

Saa tog hun Refraichisseuren og duschede ud mod Halvmørket, der
begyndte, hvor Lyskredsen under Lampens store Skærm holdt op. Hun
lod tankeløs Blikket glide hen over den Smule Glans, der var over
Guldsnittet paa Bøgerne og Doktorens blanke Instrumenter henne i
Skabene.

Rejste sig derpaa og lukkede Fløjdørene ind til det lille
vaabendekorerede Forværelse, hvor Aviser og Aargange af »Puk« og
»Fliegende Blätter« laa ordnede paa Midterbordet. Portièren blev
trukken sammen, Folderne smukt ordnede; saa vendte hun sig og
stod og saa paa den hyggelige Stue med Familieportrætterne, nogle
Landskabsbilleder og de magelige bløde Møbler; deres mørke grønne
Farve behagede Øjet -- ligesom Værelsets øvrige Udstyr -- uden
særligt at fængsle det, talte om hyggeligt Velvære og en Smag,
der ikke stred og ikke havde Trang til at stride mod det, som var
almindelig anerkendt som god Smag i denne Provinsby, en af Landets
største.

Fruen gik langsomt og let hen over Gulvet og flyttede Lampen og sin
Bog hen paa et Bord, der var stillet ved den store Stol, som optog
Pladsen i Krogen ved den lune, grønne Ovn.

Hun satte sig mageligt til Rette og sad og saa lidt ud i Stuen.
Strakte saa Haanden ud, tog Cigaretetuiet paa det lille Bord og
tændte; et Øjeblik sad hun med Cigaretten i Haanden og røg lidt; saa
var heller ikke det morsomt længere, hun lagde den, tog igen fat paa
sin franske Roman og læste et Par Sider.

Holdt pludselig op med en Mine, som om noget havde berørt hende
ubehageligt -- -- igen dette: en overmægtig Sanselighed og en
pinefuld Lidenskabelighed, der krævede sit Offer for bagefter at lade
Livet ligge hen -- dobbelt øde, trist og indholdsløst. --

Nu havde hun tabt Lysten til at læse. -- Det ny Broderi? -- Hun
skulde være rigtig oplagt, naar hun begyndte paa det.

Der laa nogle Piecer og Beretninger, som hendes Mand havde bedt hende
interessere sig lidt for, han var saa optaget af de Sager i denne
Tid. Hun tog et af Hefterne og bladede lidt, -- lagde det igen, --
det var saa uskønt og kedsommeligt. --

Der lød sagte Trin over Tæppet inde i hendes Cabinet, og Stuepigen,
en høj, nydelig Pige, kom ind.

»Manse bliver ved at græde; han længes vist efter sit Bad og sin Mad.
Trine og jeg kan jo godt besørge det, hvis Fruen er træt.«

»Nej, nu kommer jeg, Heralda.«

Den unge Frue rejste sig hurtigt og gik med. --

Da Doktoren lidt senere kom hjem, kaldte hun, glad og optaget, paa
ham, og han skyndte sig ind i Soveværelset, gnidende Kulden af sine
Hænder. --

Heralda holdt en Lampe i Vejret, saa Musklerne paa hendes blottede,
kraftige Arm traadte frem; Kokkepigen, der nødigt vilde gaa glip af
den unge Herres Badescene, syslede med Barnetøjet, der var hængt til
Varme ved Kakkelovnen.

Fruen stod og holdt den lille Fyr nede i Karret. Det buttede, søde
Barnelegeme gav smaa Ryk af Glæde, og den bitte lille, tykke Haand
slog henrykt ned i det lunkne Vand.

Doktorens Øjne straalede; da han traadte ind, var han endnu lidt
ærgerlig efter en hidsig Debat om kommunale Sager med Borgmesteren,
-- -- nu gav han sig optaget til at pludre til sin dejlige Dreng,
indtil han fik ham ganske ellevild af Velvære.

       *       *       *       *       *

En Uge efter sad Fruen i Spisestuen med Fødderne paa en høj Skammel;
paa hendes Skød laa den lille Dreng, der havde været farlig syg i
flere Dage.

Medens hun mekanisk syslede med ham, trillede Taarerne ned ad hendes
Kinder og faldt paa hans Ansigt.

Han slog besværligt Øjnene op; de laa dybt inde i Hulningerne, og
deres Udtryk var lidende som hos et voksent Menneske; de blodløse
Læber bevægede han svagt, og han havde ikke Kræfter til at røre
Benene, da Moderen tog Tøjet af ham.

Doktoren stod og saa til sammen med en ældre Kollega ...

Denne undersøgte Barnet og sagde derpaa:

»De maa straks se at faa fat i en god Amme. Det er det eneste, der
kan redde ham.«

»En Amme!« gentog Fruen og saa hurtigt op.

»Jeg skal telegrafere til Stiftelsen, naar jeg gaar herfra. De gør
nok Dem den Tjeneste, de Herrer derinde ...«

Da Doktoren traadte ind i sit Værelse, efter at have fulgt Lægen
ud, stod hans Hustru og flyttede mekanisk med Fotografierne paa
Skrivebordet.

Hun brast i Graad, da han kom hen til hende.

Han tog ømt om hende.

»Græd ikke, kære kære ...«

Men saa gav hun efter for sin tilbagetrængte Trang til rigtig at
hulke. Al hendes Sorg og krænkede Moderfølelse gav sig voldsomt
Udslag.

Men han kyssede hende og spurgte med Ord, som han ikke plejede
at bruge, og med en Stemme, der var fuldere og varmere end hans
sædvanlige, om _han_ da var helt ude af hendes Tanker, om den
Lykke, som de to ejede, og som havde fyldt ham med uopslidelig
Modstandskraft mod al Lidelse, da intet betød for hende, -- naar
Sorgen kom.

Hun løftede Hovedet.

Det flammede op i ham ved at læse hendes Øjnes Svar.

Hun knugede sig med et dybt Suk ind til ham; saa gik hun stille ind
til sit syge Barn. --

       *       *       *       *       *

Den store, svære Amme tog fat paa den lille udmattede Dreng med
sikker Ro.

Medlidende lagde hun ham til Brystet og dryppede et Par Draaber ind
mellem de trætte, smaa Læber; selv det syntes at anstrænge ham, han
faldt straks igen hen i tung Søvn.

Men efterhaanden, som han kunde tage mere Næring til sig, blev han
raskere og raskere.

Sundheden drog atter til Huse med den fynske, djærve Maren. --

Fruen begyndte igen at ofre Tid og Opmærksomhed paa sin Frisures og
sit Toilettes pyntelige Detailler, og Visitterne blev modtagne, til
Dels gengældte. --

Snart blev det saadan, at det næsten var dagligdags, at Doktoren,
naar han kom hjem fra Praxis, maatte ind at klæde sig om for at gaa
til Middag.

Naar han næsten var færdig, plejede hans Hustru at komme ind, for hun
havde saa uendelig meget at fortælle om Manses mange Paafund.

Tænk, han havde taget Maren i Næsen, saa det gjorde _ondt_, ligefrem
ondt -- han havde saa mærkværdig mange Kræfter allerede; Maren havde
slaaet ham over Fingrene, men saa havde han drejet sig paa hendes
Skød; det saa ud, som han vilde slaa igen. »Han bliver vist rigtig
uartig,« sagde hun stolt og lykkelig.

Og saadan havde hun den ene Historie efter den anden at fortælle om
Manse. Han _var_ nu ikke saa langt tilbage som andre Børn i den Alder.

Doktoren var nær ved at mene det samme.

»Hvem der kunde blive hjemme hos jer!«

Men det gik jo ikke an. Man kunde jo ikke blive ved at isolere sig.

»Naar _Du_ endda tog med.«

Og saa begyndte de igen paa den Komedie, at han agerede gnaven og
jaloux paa Manse, -- indtil hun alvorligt kom med sit: -- ikke Tale
om, at hun allerede gik fra Barnet, der havde været lige ved at dø!

De kyssede Uhyggen bort og begyndte igen at spøge.

Han fuldendte sit Toilet med en forstilt Omhu, som gav hende
Anledning til smilende og smaadrillende at hentyde til visse
Lapserier fra Ungkarledagene.

Opdagede de saa, at han var ved at komme for sent, fór han i Kjolen,
medens hun rakte ham Uhr og Nøgleknippe. Og han gik til Døren.

»Skynd Dig dog nu,« sagde hun; men Tonen og Maaden var saadan, at
han maatte tilbage endnu engang.

Hun gik smilende og glad med ind i Spisestuen, tog selv Pelsen fra
Heralda for at faa ham af Sted saa hurtigt, som muligt.

Men han gemte hende ind i den og truede med at bortføre hende med
Magt.

»Den tykke, kurtiserende Hr. Postmester til Bords og Æren af at
converseres af Tante Rosalie ved Kaffen om Mines eller Lines
Madkærester. Kan Du modstaa?« lokkede han.

Heralda smilede diskret; men Maren, der stillede med Manse, som
skulde sige »adjøs til Fatter«, lo højt.

Herren og Fruen saa til hinanden, halvt muntert, halvt vemodigt; det
var, som der efter Spændingen var kommen en vis ubevidst Reaktion,
der fik dem til at være lystige, næsten legende i hinandens Selskab,
medens de dog havde saa let ved at føle Refleksen af Sygdomsdagenes
Angst og Sorg.

       *       *       *       *       *

Maren blev snart uundværlig.

Efterhaanden som Mindet om den Alvor, der brutalt og ukaldet havde
paatrængt sig de unge Folk, blegnede, kom den statelige, typiske
Maren ligefrem til at »tage sig ud« som saa meget andet Tilbehør i
det elegante Hjem.

Fruen fik travlt med at gaa til Syersker med Maren, der skulde have
store Forklæder, Hue med røde Hagebaand og andet, som hørte til, naar
hun skulde ligne en Bondekone i Nationaldragt.

Og desuden maatte Fruen tage sig Tid til at sidde i Ro ved sit
Sybord, for hun vilde selv tegne og brodere Manses Kørepels og hvide
Kjoler, -- og han _maatte_ have flere af forskellig Størrelse, for --
hvor han lagde sig ud! -- --

Doktoren havde intet imod paa sin Vandring i Byen at møde »Optoget«.

Maren saa formelig statelig ud i sin Uniform, og det var med bevidst
Værdighed, at hun skød den blanke, pudsede Vogn med den yndige Dreng
... Og .. hvor var hans Hustru dog smuk ... denne tilbageholdne,
rolige Mine; .. hendes beundrede Ungpigeskønhed var afløst af en
langt finere og mere tavs Ynde.

Saa kunde det hænde, at Manse fik Doktorens Stok at holde paa, og
at de fulgtes hjem alle fire ... Maren i passende Afstand foran med
Vognen og svingende og svajende med de vide Skørter.

Naar Heralda stod i Vinduet og saa dem komme, faldt hun i Tanker.

For hende blev det uvilkaarligt saadan, at Doktorens ridderlige
Ægtemandsvæsen kastede en vis Afglans over hendes Kæreste, den flotte
Skorstensfejersvend, og det blev efter sit Herskabs Forhold, at hun
dannede sig sit Ægteskabsideal.

       *       *       *       *       *

Heralda skulde nok vogte sig for at give de Tanker Luft overfor
Maren, skønt de to var blevne meget fortrolige, især efter at Fruen
i et Anfald af Sparsommelighed havde givet Kokkepigen Afsked og
engageret en Pige, der gik hver Aften tidligt for at bo i sit Hjem.

Herskabet var igen begyndt at tage ud sammen til Koncerter, Theater
og Middagsselskaber; Heralda og Maren var ofte ene hjemme.

De lod da Døren staa aaben ind til Marens Værelse, hvor Manse, mæt
og tilfreds, sov i sin Vugge, og saa gjorde de sig det hyggeligt i
Spisestuen.

Heralda dækkede op med The og Smørrebrød. »Theva'j!« udbrød Maren,
»det ka' je'tte taale aa loute. Det er te' aa forgi' Mæj'sker me'
... saa gaar je' da hellere te' Va'jposti. -- Nej e' lille Drove go'
Kaffe! ..«

Og saa lavede Heralda Kaffe til hende; hun gjorde det med god
Samvittighed, for Maren skulde jo fedes og føjes.

Til Gengæld var Maren underholdende ... Hun fortalte saadanne
Historier fra »Stiftelsen«, at Heralda blev ganske bleg derved.

Men Maren havde ogsaa de rørende paa Lager ... fra den Tid hun var
sytten Aar og blev Malkepige paa Herregaarden og vilde springe i
Voldgraven af Sorg over, at hun var kommen for Skade og havde været
»saa ma'esløs uheldig«.

»Det va'tte te' aa nære sig for det Rak,« raisonnerede hun mut.

Men farlig Grin havde de alligevel havt. »Gu' sikken Sjov med
Forvalteri' og Landvæsenseleverne, som var saa store paa det, men
ku' si'e saa maje grinagtig »Komplementer« aa den Slavs Slu'er, naar
de mødte en stakkels Pige alene. -- Og saa Frøkenen, som knap ga'
lukke sin Mund op te' én, naar hun kom ne' i Mejeriet aa sku ha' den
nymaalk'de Mælk -- ja, li'e -- fræss fra Fass, som ha' sa'e -- denne
her Elever fra Køvenhavn. Ja dov, dov, hvor var hun storsnu'et. Hun
var da bleven kulret, hvis hun ha'e vidst, at hendes Grevekæreste
gerne vilde spelle Kæreste me' vos, naar ha' ku' komme gedolt fra'et,
den Luskemikkel.« Og Maren skoggerlo. Hun nærede ingen Illusioner om
Mændene; dem kendte hun kun fra en Side, men den kendte hun ogsaa til
Gavns.

Heralda benyttede Pavsen til at gøre et Forsøg paa at faa sin
sædvanlige Tone indført; hun talte om, hvor mageløs Doktoren var mod
Fruen, og hvor den unge Candidat Hansen, der kom til Doktorens og
spillede Violin, var forelsket i Frøkenen fra Etatsraadens.

Men det interesserede ikke Maren videre.

»De ere li'e tovlie allesammen,« sagde hun afsluttende. -- »Din Jokum
..«

»Joakim Larsen!« afbrød Heralda.

»Hvorfor kommer ha' ikke aa besøjer Dig? Ha' gaar nok paa Lærkensjov,
si'en ha' ikke har været her.«

»Min Familie synes ikke om, at han besøger mig paa mit Værelse,«
svarede Heralda hovmodigt. Der var dog Forskel.

»Naa saa det gør de ikke«, sagde Maren, helt imponeret af den Tanke.

Men saa gled hun ind paa det Omraade, hvor hun var mest hjemme. Og
Heralda vænnede sig efterhaanden til hendes Historier. -- --

»Men naar der kommer Børn?« spurgte Heralda en Aften, uhyggelig
tilmode.

»Skidt, de bliver sgu nok forsørret!« Maren slog overlegent ud med
Haanden. Lidt efter vedblev hun:

»Je' har haut tre. Ja, s'mend. Nummer to ... hans Far ... ja, dov,
dov, sikken Malasje me' den Unge ... hans Far var et lille tovli',
højbenet Kræ, der var i Besøj hos Grevens og var helt mør over det,
at Comtessen vi'te se te' den Si'e ha' var, og det skønt de danjsed'
og regered' me' Baler og Kommers den Sommer. Saa ku' ha' ju'tte nære
sig ... ja, skidt var det, og fuld var ha' mest, ha' sa' nere hos
Forvalteri og bælled' sig, naar di an're ha' lagt sig om Autningen.
Og saa kom Barunen jo væsgo' ne til mit Kammer og ga' sig lisse
ønkelig ... Storsnu'et og spedalsk blev ha' jo, for je' lukked' jo
Krampen paa for ham. -- Men je' var jo smaat kørendes me' Penge, ...
saa gik det galt elejn.«

»Herregud Maren; men Barnet Du talte om?«

»Ja, hvor je' tvined' over den Unge, der var ju'tte mer Ky' paa
ham end som Tobak for en Skilling. Idiot var ha' jo osse da! Gu',
hvor ha' hørsed' me' mig, den ny Dovter, -- je' maatte klarere
hele Re'ligheden u' for ham om denne her lille skitte Barun, der
var svirende. Ja, det var da nu ledt. -- Ungen fik je' da paa
Anstalten, frit me' Betalning og det hele, men gratis Skældu' fik je'
i Tilgivt af Dovteri. Ja, _ha'_ var skrap! -- Min a'en Dreng, det
var en a'erledes Fæ'relandsforsvarer end den lille Barununge ... Ja,
Herregu' -- nu har je'tte set ham i tre O'er.«

»Maren, hvor kan De udholde det for Længsel!«

»Det ve' je'tte! -- Je ha'tte haut Stunder te' aa tænke paa det.
-- Men det var li'egodt farlig Plasér aa bisse ne' te' min Mor om
Autningen, for Ungen, ha' var li'e te ha' skrinked', naar ha' saa
mig. Og hva' brø' je' mig om no'en Slavs Bal i den Ti', og Ka'lene,
de grinte jo. Og je' lo' dem grinne. -- Men saa var'et jo, at Naaden,
hun var hellig, og je' var bleven Vaskoppige, og saa vilde hun ju'tte
ha' mig i Køkkenet, je' maatte sgu afste' te' Majdag. Saa fik je'
Plads i Byen, og -- -- je' ve' sgu'tte, je' ku' da'tte sitte og glo
i det Hummer ve' Køkkenet hver Auten u'en at lukke min Mund op, saa
je' ku' hverken gø eller gave te'sidst; -- tovlie Mandfolk er der jo,
hvor vi _saa_ kommer, -- ja, det er sgu'tte saadan, -- men je' fik
da'tte Drengen at se, før je' rejste te' Køvenhavn, for Kærresten
ha'e det me' Fornemmelser. Ja og Køvenhavn, Heralda ... der er det nu
da saa møj tovli alsammen.« --

»Kæresten der var da for Resten stoderet,« vedblev hun ... »Saa kom
je' jo paa Stiftelsen ... je' klaver itte, Behandlingen var riæl
nok; je' ha'e det dov be'er end som Vaskekonen, hun var givt og det
hele, men hun maatte sgu lægge sig i Pjalterne og Møjet; je' fik da
baa'e Renlighe' og Opvartning.«

»Var det ogsaa en Dreng, stakkels Maren?«

»Det var et Pi'ebarn ... Der kom no'ne fine Folk, je' maa sgu'tte
si'e, hvem de er, de var helt væk i hende, og de bestilte hende te
aa komme te' dem, naar jeg rejste; je' skrev under paa en hel Del.
Saa kom je' jo herover paa en Studs, her er jo go' Fortjeneste;
Ma'en klaver je'te paa, og Dovteren og Fruen er jo da osse maje pæne
Mæ'jsker.« --

Manse tillod sig at smaagrynte lidt.

»Saa nu ska' det Kræ te' aa tre'e mig igen,« udbrød Maren, »Du ka'
ta' og vende ham.«

Da Heralda atter havde sat sig til Rette, begyndte Maren Samtalen
igen.

»Du er for Resten en Sta'spige at se paa, Ralde. Sikke tynd Du er.«

»Naa--aa.« Heralda vred sig smigret.

»Ja, nu ka' Du jo bare vente, te' Du har vaaren me' tre Gange;«
tilføjede Maren eftertænksomt.

»Slæbe og sli'e, te' man ønsker det uskyldige Liv Fa'en i Vold,«,
blev hun ved uden at agte paa Heraldas Mine. »Første Gang slævede je'
Vand te' en Time, før je' la'e mig ... Saa gaar »Figuren« sgu ... Det
skal Du se, naar Du først er i'et.«

Heralda blev fnysende vred og hvast fornærmet.

»Ja« .. sagde Maren uforstyrrelig, »saadan var je' osse .. lynende i
Ho'et, straks de kom te' mig me' Vrøvl ... Men saa er de jo saa sø'e
og sleske de Bæster, og ve' ikke, hvor de ska' skave sig og snakke
om Kærlighe' og den Slavs ... Men bav etter, naar vi ska' ha' Penge
te' Ungen, ja ... saa er der en a'en Snak, -- ja der er ... Og vi ka'
da'tte drovne dem som Kattekil'jer.«

Saa ringede det.

Maren ryddede af Vejen, og Heralda tog mod Herskabet.

Fruen kom straks ind i Spisestuen. Hun var i stort Toilette, det
silkeforede Slag hang løst over hendes smukke Skuldre, og hun var ved
at trække Hanskerne af.

Der var noget sødt og skælmsk over hende; Rødme i Kinderne og et Skær
i Øjnene af vaagen Livfuldhed; nu brød en varmere og dybere Glans
frem i dem, idet hun sagde:

»Hvordan har min dejlige Dreng det, Maren?«

Med Forsøg paa byagtig Tonefald svarede Maren:

»Det sø'e lille Bæst, je' tror s'men ikke, det varer længe, inden
ha' begønner aa vil plotte paa aa si'e no'et; ha' plaskede saadan i
Ba'et, det er vout, je' ka' tomle ham.«

Og Fruen og Doktoren smilede venligt til den tro Maren, der holdt saa
meget af deres Dreng og var saa god ved ham.

Fruen betænkte sig lidt. Maren syntes jo ikke om, at Manse blev
forstyrret, -- men -- hun _maatte_ liste sig ind og se ham endnu
engang, -- der var saa længe til i Morgen tidlig.

Søde, halvaabne Barnemund, runde, bløde Kind med Øjenvippernes mørke
Frynser, det lille Legemes sunde Varme -- hun kunde ikke lade være at
lægge sig ned ved Vuggen og kysse sit Barn og se paa det.

Manse begyndte at røre sig og gav sig lidt efter til at smaagræde.
Maren kom fornærmet ind. Ganske jaloux og ulykkelig saa Fruen paa,
hvor stille han straks blev, da Maren tog ham op.

Maren var imidlertid i naadigt Lune og holdt Drengen hen til Fruen
til Godnatkys. Forsigtigt kyssede hun hans Kind og de smaa buttede
Hænder og Fødder; saa gik hun beroliget ud.

Da hun var alene med sin Mand, sagde hun med Overbevisning:

»Du ... Maren er saa flink og fornuftig, -- Du kan tro, hun har lidt
meget under sit Fejltrin.«

Doktoren svarede ikke.

       *       *       *       *       *

Et Aarstid senere sad Doktoren og Fruen i hendes Cabinet.

De havde siddet længe stille i Tusmørket uden at tale.

Da lød det lille Klap, som sagde, at Lygten derude paa Vejen blev
tændt, og det usikre, dæmpede Lys faldt ind over Fruens Ansigt.

Hun sad med Hænderne hvilende i Skødet og saa' underlig blødt og
fraværende ind i Halvmørket.

Hendes Mand bøjede sig frem og tog hendes Haand. Det var, som hun kom
tilbage; hun smilede blidt og lagde sig ind til ham ...

Gennem de lukkede Døre hørte man inde fra den anden Stue en høj
Barnestemmes kejtede Pludren; den blev afbrudt af Marens fynske: »Du
ve' nok, hvor Skauet ska' staa, din lille Knæjtebasse.«

De to henne i Sofaen lo lidt.

Saa sagde Doktoren:

»Bliver det ikke godt for Manse, at han ikke altid skal være den
eneste.«

»Ellers blev der nok ingen Ende paa Forkælelsen, mener Du.«

»Ja, netop ..«

»Havde jeg nu blot havt Heralda. Hun gik saa stille og passede alting
og havde saa behageligt et Væsen ... Jeg vænner mig aldrig til Laura;
hun gør mig nervøs med sine klodsede Manerer og sin evige Spørgen ...
At Heralda, den nydelige Pige, ogsaa ... nej, det er og bliver mig en
Gaade og en ligefrem Sorg.«

»Det var værst for hende selv .... stakkels Pige.«

»Uf, den Kæreste ... Har Du set ham siden?«

»Jeg mødte ham forleden og talte med ham.«

»Spurgte Du om Barnet ...?«

»Jeg fik at vide, hvor det var i Pleje .... Han tog ellers Sagen
meget flot, skældte ud over Heraldas Fader, der er vred og ikke vil
se hende. Men han havde godt Arbejde, sagde han, og skulde nok vise
den Gamle noget andet, senere; .... men han var jo lovlig ung til at
gifte sig og binde sig.«

»Sagde han det?«

»Ja, med en vis Medlidenhed med sig selv. Jeg tillod mig da ogsaa at
sige, at det skulde han have betænkt noget før.«

»Stakkels Heralda!«

»Hun har en god Plads og holder meget af Barnet, som hun ammer.«

»Og hendes eget ..?«

»Ved Du hvad ... Du skulde tage ud at se til det en Dag, naar det
bliver godt Vejr.«

»Ud paa Landet!«

»Ti Minutter med Jernbanen ... Du har saa godt af at færdes lidt. Du
murer Dig saa meget inde herhjemme nu.«

»Ja ... men ... tager Du med?«

»Nej ... nu maa Du holde dit Løfte og ikke kun tænke paa din Svaghed.
Husk paa .. Barnet .. Det er jo ikke blot legemligt, at det bliver
til ... dets Sjæl, Temperament, Karakter ... Aah min egen ....« Og
han knugede hende pludselig stormende og lykkelig i sine Arme.

       *       *       *       *       *

Den unge Frue stod og saa fortabt ud over Markerne, hvor Toget, der
havde ført hende her til Landsbyen, brusede af Sted.

Nu var det borte. Kun en hvid, urolig Damp drev lavt hen over Jorden.

Hvis den nu formede sig, nærmede sig, omsnoede hende og kvalte hende
...

Hun knugede nervøst Hænderne sammen i Muffen. Alle de Fantasier, der
allerede var faret gennem hendes Hjærne i den korte Tid, siden hun
sagde Farvel til sin Mand! Hvorfor var han dog ikke ogsaa taget med!
..

Hun gik hen ad Vejen og spurgte sig frem til Bondehuset, hvor
Heraldas Dreng var i Pleje.

Først bankede hun høfligt paa Døren. Men da ingen svarede, løftede
hun med nogen Besvær Klinken, der satte tydelige Mærker paa hendes
Hansker, og traadte ind i et Slags stenlagt Bryggers.

Eller Køkken var det maaske. I det mindste stod der paa Sidebordet
et Lerfad med Flæskeben, og henne fra den aabne Skorsten lugtede der
stærkt af Grønkaal og brændte Kviste.

Fruen gik ind i Stuen.

Heller ikke her var nogen.

Hun saa sig nysgerrig og lidt beklemt om, hostede for at melde sin
Tilstedeværelse, men hørte intet andet Svar end det store Slaguhrs
langsomme tik tak.

Jo, nu skelnede hun et spædt Barns sagte Klynken henne fra Alkoven.

Hun gik hen imod den, flyttede en Stol, hvorpaa der stod et Vandfad
med Øllebrød, og kigede ind mellem de stribede Gardiner.

Der, paa de tykke Dyner med det grove, snavsede, krøllede Lagen, laa
Drengen.

Den, der havde givet ham af Øllebrøden, havde ikke baaret sig særligt
behændigt ad, for hans lille Ansigt var oversmurt med Maden, der var
tørret ind og sad i Klatter paa den fine, bløde Hud.

Hvor blev Manse dog anderledes omhyggeligt plejet og passet! Fruen
kom til at huske paa, at Svigermoder engang, før han blev født, havde
sendt hende noget fint duftende Sæbe, og i Brevet stod der: Du véd
ikke, hvor det er dejligt at lægge saadan et lille blødt, parfumeret
Barnehoved op til sin Kind ... Og nu denne stakkels, lille Dreng her!

Og stakkels Heralda!

Mon hun vidste, hvor uforsigtige de var med hendes Barn; han kunde jo
ligge der og græde, til han fik Krampe, uden at nogen hørte ham!

Medlidenheden bortjog fuldstændig hendes Uvilje mod Pigen. --

Der lød Træskoklapren udenfor.

Døren blev skubbet op, og en Kone traadte ind. Hun saa spørgende paa
den fremmede, fine Dame. --

»Naa .. det er Heraldes Frue. Ja, hun var jo ellers flink nok, si'er
de. Vi vilde jo heller ikke ta' mo' saadan enhver Rendetøs,« sagde
Konen værdigt. »Naa De ve' vel, hun kommer i Dau; -- ja, det gør hun
-- ja, om et lille Korn tænker je', hun er her. De ka' godt sitte ner
saa længe. -- Væ' s'go dov. Maaske De vil ha' en Taar Kaffe? Naa ja,
for je' ku' jo snart faa Kedlen paa. -- Ja, je' maa stræve, vi sku'
jo ha' Risbrændet rubbet a' Vejen inden Auten.«

Konen vendte Drengen og stak ham en Sukkersut i Munden; derpaa gik
hun igen til sit Arbejde.

Fruen sad lidt paa Træstolen henne ved Vinduet.

Saa blev hun urolig og gik op og ned ad Gulvet; hun mærkede,
hvorledes denne usædvanlige Situation voldte hende legemligt Ubehag.

Men saa tog hun sig sammen.

Det var dog altfor umuligt, hvis hun besvimede her og maaske blev
lagt ind paa den Seng.

Det var ogsaa Synd af ham at holde saa bestemt paa, at hun skulde
rejse alene.

Maaske det kun var denne indelukkede, tunge Luft her, der gjorde
hende syg.

Hun gik ud paa Vejen og gav sig til at spadsere frem og tilbage, fast
bestemt paa at vente her, i Stedet for, som Doktoren havde sagt,
at faa Lov at sidde i Kromandens Stadsstue og drikke Mælk og spise
Landbrød, indtil Toget gik. Hun vilde hilse paa Heralda og tale med
hende; det var dog i hendes Hus, at Pigen var kommen i Ulykke, og --
maaske havde hun noget at gøre godt igen; saa haard som mod Heralda
havde hun aldrig været mod nogen. Hun kunde ikke lade være at tænke
paa den Eftermiddag, da Pigen, bleg og grædende, betroede sig til
hende; paa hendes afbrudte og stammende Bekendelse havde hun kold og
rolig svaret:

»De maa jo saa hurtigst muligt ud af Huset.«

Hvor havde hun ogsaa kunnet tale saa haardt og overlegent; det tænkte
hun nu, medens hun gik frem og tilbage, mat og træt og med Graaden
i Halsen. -- Men langsomt, lidt efter lidt, beroligede den uvante
Stilhed hendes oprørte Nerver.

Hun blev staaende og saa ud over de udstrakte Pløjemarker, hvor Rimen
endnu laa mellem Knoldene, og hvor Kragerne hoppede om i tunge Sæt,
saa fløj de skrigende op, hen mod de store, lave Bøndergaarde, om
hvilke Poppelpilen stod med de tørre Kvistes spilede Grenenet mod den
svagt skyede, blege Vinterhimmel.

Hvor var her dog ... næsten morsomt stille. Hun lagde Mærke til,
hvor tydeligt hun kunde høre en ensom Vogns Rullen ude paa den faste
Hovedlandevej. Og hvor var det smukt med de mørke Straatages grønne
Mos, der saa' saa lyst ud i det dæmpede Solskin.

Men koldt var det alligevel at staa stille.

Den unge Frue begyndte igen at gaa frem og tilbage.

Men hun er ikke mere saa optaget af sig selv og sine egne Tanker; hun
er begyndt at se sig om.

Inde ved Vinduet i et af Smaahusene sidder en gammel Kone med et
stærkt rynket, meget udslidt, men mildt og stilfærdigt Ansigt.

Fruen kan ikke lade være at lægge Mærke til det. Konen hilser med et
Nik og viser sig lidt efter i Døren: »Værsgo' vil De ikke indenfor,
det er da saa koldt at gaa og vente.«

Fruen tager mod Indbydelsen og følger med den Gamle ind i den lille,
lave Stue med den brede Seng med Sirtses Sengetæppe og den høje
Kommode, hvor et Par hvide Porcellænshunde staa og glo stift paa hver
Side af Biblen og den store Salmebog. Den Gamle beder hende sætte sig
i Stolen ved Vinduet.

»Ja men, er det ikke Deres Plads?«

Den Gamle er næsten fornærmet. »Der ska' De re'nok sætte Dem; det er
den bedste Stol; den er saa go' i Sitningen.«

»Tror De, jeg kan se, naar der gaar nogen ind i det lille Hus her ved
Siden af?«

»Je' ska nok ha' Øje me' Vejen; det er vel Heralde, De ska' tale
me'?« ...

Og den Gamle underholder, dreven af et medfødt Gæstfrihedsinstinkt,
den fremmede Dame, og de komme snart i Passiar.

Fruen hægtede Pelsen op.

Den anden rejste sig med lidt Besvær for at hjælpe hende den af.

»Aa Herregu'! Naa ja; De er vel nylig bleven givt. Ja, je' ka' tænke
det.«

»Ikke saa ganske nylig,« svarer Fruen med et lille Smil.

»Saadan en ung, køn Kone! Ja, ja, Modernavnet er helligt,« siger den
Gamle, der endnu er i den Tankerække, som Synet af hendes Gæst vakte
i hende. »Modernavnet er helligt. Herregu', ja. Ellers sto' vi vel
heller ikke alt det igennem. De ka' tro, -- det er et stort Øjeblik,
naar vi lægger Barnet til Brystet. Aah, vi knuger det ind te' vos,
aah saa fast, saa fast ..«

Fruen havde pludselig faaet Glans i Øjnene og Rødme i Kinderne. Den
gamle, fattige Moders højtidelige Tonefald fik hendes Hjærte til at
banke af en dyb og hemmelig Lykke.

»Ja, der er jo no'e at staa igennem,« vedblev den Gamle. »Da Knu'
blev født, var det saa fattigt for vos; og vi ha'e ikke skikket Bu'
te' Bønderne. -- Saa plejede de ikke van at sende Basselma' dengang,«
tilføjede hun forklarende. »En bitte Flæsk og lidt Katøfler ha'e vi
da i Huset. Ja, og saa Øllebrø' i en Ørepotte; det fik je', og je'
spiste det altsammen. For je' var bleven sulten, ska' je' si'e Dem.
Og saa sa'e Rasmus: Nej, nu har je' sgu aldrig set Ma'e, har Du spist
alt det! Ja, og je' ku' ha' spist mer', om vi ha' haut det, sa'e je'.«

Den Gamle lo fornøjet, som om hun havde sagt noget morsomt. Og hun
gentog: »Og Rasmus sa'e: nej, nu har je' sgu aldrig set Ma'e, har Du
spist alt det! Ja saamænd.«

Fruen saa interesseret paa hendes milde, men hærgede Ansigt. Dette
var noget saa nyt for hende, der var saa forvænt og havde det
saa trygt og fredet og dog var blødagtig og ilde til Mode i sin
Ørkesløshed og sin stadige Spekuleren over sig selv.

Den Gamle blev snaksomt og fortroligt ved.

»De ka' tro, je' døjet me' min første. Ve' og faa ham te' Brystet.
Aah, je' maatte ha' et Tørkle' i Munden for ikke at skri'e. Og saa
var det jo, at min Mor kom ovre fra Taas'je for at se til mig. Og de'
va' jo yndigt for mig. Men saa sier hun: men jahne dog, skammer du
dig ikke din tovle Tøs, ve du se, du ka' faa ham til og ta' ve'. Tror
du, du ka' køve Mælk til ham hele Vinteren! Saa maatte je' jo staa
det igennem; ja, je maatte ... Men Jøsses je snakker, og nu piver
Toget. Saa kommer Heralde straks.«

Lidt efter saa de den høje, ranke Pige gaa hurtigt forbi Vinduerne.

Den Gamle rejste sig for at se efter hende.

»Ja, nu gik hun jo saa ind til Hjulmandens.«

»Maaske jeg maa vente et lille Øjeblik endnu her. Jeg vil ikke saa
gerne forstyrre lige straks.«

»Nej, det er vel heller ikke værd. Det er jo dog hendes Barn, den
stakkels Tøs ...«

Da Fruen skulde til at gaa, fulgte den Gamle hende helt ud gennem den
lille Forhave.

»De maa passe godt paa Stien, for den er lidt glat ... Ja, Farvel
lille Frue ... Gu' velsigne Dem. Og kommer De en a'en Gang, saa ka'
De godt sitte og vente her; der lugter jo ikke altid saa godt, hvor
der er smaa Børn og saadan ... Det er ikke saa redt, naar Manden
ta'er sig en Taar. Nej det er ikke ... og kivsomt er det for Konen.«

Fruen stod stille og nikkede, før hun gik ind ad Naboens Dør. Den
Gamle var bleven staaende med Hænderne under Forklædet og saa venligt
efter hende ...

Heralda, der sad med sin Dreng, saa' trodsigt op, da hendes forrige
Frue kom ind.

Men Trodsen blev til et stort, rørt Smil, da Fruen bøjede sig ned
over Drengen og sagde:

»Til Lykke med dit Barn, Heralda. Det er jo en sund og frisk lille
Gut.«

Lidt efter sad hun og saa interesseret og deltagende paa Pigen, der
vaskede og badede sit Barn under mange sørgmodige Udbrud over det
forsømte, lille Legeme.

»Aah Frue ... kan Fruen huske, at jeg havde Lov at benytte
Badeværelset hos Dem hver Lørdag ... Og nu skal det lille Skind være
i saadan et Griseri.«

Heraldas Taarer faldt paa Barnetøjet, som hun tog efterhaanden, som
Fruen lagde det til Rette for hende.

Heralda knugede Barnet ind til sig og saa knapt paa Fruen, naar denne
talte til hende.

Barnet drejede sit lille Hovede nærmere ind til hende.

Da brast hun i Graad.

»Herregud, min lille, elskede Henrik; er Du sulten? Kan Du huske, Du
fik din Mad hos mig den første Tid! -- Jamen, jeg maa jo ikke, jeg
tør jo ikke, min lille, kære, yndige Dreng; jeg tør jo ikke, saa er
der jo ikke noget til lille Kaj, naar jeg kommer hjem.«

Fruen vendte sig heftigt om og gav sig til at se ud af Vinduet for
at skjule sin Bevægelse. Hun kom til at tænke paa nogle Ord, som hun
havde hørt paa en Visit, hvor hun havde truffen Heraldas nuværende
Frue; en Dame havde sagt: »Det er rigtignok udmærket, De faar en
Amme, saa er De dog mindre bunden!« Og Kajs Moder havde svaret: »Ja,
ellers blev det for generende. For min Skyld kan vi godt begynde paa
Prøverne til Basarkomedien nu; jeg kan jo heldigvis være hjemme fra,
saa meget det skal være.«

Det var en underlig tom og flov Følelse at mindes dette, her, i denne
Stue.

Men i næste Nu svulmede al hendes Hjærtes Kærlighed, -- hvad var dog
al den tidopslugende Færden sammen med ligegyldige Selskabsmennesker
mod den ene, stærke, dejlige Følelse at have sit Barn -- nyt Liv,
rigt paa alle gode Muligheder, nyt Liv, som man elskede uforklarligt.

Den samme Kærlighedsfølelse havde Pigen, -- saa var hendes Hjærte
ikke fordærvet -- Pigen, som kun i korte Øjeblikke kunde gemme sit
Barn i sine Arme. --

Hvorfor, hvorfor er det ikke saadan, at hun og hendes Kæreste har
respekteret Samfundets Ordning af Kærlighedsforholdet, har bunden
sig til hinanden og først faaet Barnet, naar de tilhører hinanden
for altid, og aldrig nogen anden Mand eller Kvinde har Ret til at
ønske deres Kærlighed. Bo sammen, danne Hjem sammen, modnes sammen,
dele Hverdagslivets store og smaa Indtryk, til den rette, ukunstlede
Samfølelse vokser frem og binder dem for altid til hinanden, -- det
_er_ det skønneste, det bedste og den sandeste Frivillighed. --

Ovre fra Huggehuset klang Øxeslag, jævnt og ensformigt, som de havde
lydt i mange Timer; paa Vejen kørte en Mejerikusk forbi med sine
mange Spande; en Karl, der havde været ude at skove, kom gaaende hjem
over Markstien, og fra Bondegaarden henne ved Vejskellet steg Røgen
til Vejrs og meldte om flittigt Arbejde inden Døre. --

Medens den unge Frue stod her ved det lave Vindue i den fattige Stue
og lyttede til Barnets Klynken og dets Moders ømme, bedrøvede Stemme,
gled den moderne, civiliserede Skal af hende og tog al det tillærte
med sig, og hun var kun _Moderen_, der tænkte paa det Samfund, som
engang skulde præge, smudse eller støtte hendes Søn.

Hun anede, at der blev gjort Fortræd paa en eller anden Maade, mod
hende, mod den unge Moder der og mod _Barnet_. -- Alle Børn skylder
ikke en frisk og stærk Kærlighed deres Tilværelse. Og naar de blive
voksne, mødes de af noget, der ikke er, som det skal være, men som
Samfundet vedbliver at taale, noget falsk og ophidsende, der tvinger
en usund Attraa, som ikke er givet dem af Naturens kloge Haand, ind i
deres paavirkelige Sind .... At man vovede at friste paa saa mange
Maader, at man understøttede saa megen tom Forfængelighed, fandt sig
i saa megen opblæst, latterlig Egoisme, at Kvinderne tidt var saa
tomme, saa troløse og uforstaaende og ikke havde Finhed og Ømhed
nok til at forædle de Længsler, de vakte, -- ikke kunde holde, hvad
deres Ydre lovede! -- Hvorfor banedes ikke Vejen for de Unge, hvorfor
fik de ikke Lov til at se Sandheden i Øjnene, hvorfor taarnedes
Fristelser og opslidende Adspredelser for hver Dag mere og mere op om
Slægten, som om den ikke var nydelsessyg og hastig nok i Forvejen.
Hun forstod ikke ret alt dette, som vældede ind over hende, hun anede
kun dunkelt, at noget galt var der ... hun havde ikke før tænkt nok
over det, det som gjaldt _hendes eget Barns Sjæl_.

Hun havde været med til -- tankeløs og med æstetisk Ubehag -- at
vende sig bort fra den alvorlige, fraseløse Henpegen paa Tidens
Saar og Usselheder. Hun havde været med til leende at fortabe sig
i Kantetheder og Fejltagelser hos dem, som af Kærlighed til deres
Samtidige og af Had til det, som tilsmudsede dem og øgede deres
hæsblæsende Egoisme og idéløse Materialisme, ærligt og uselvisk dog
idetmindste _forsøgte_ Kampen. --

Hun var ikke saa vidende, ikke saa erfaren, havde altid været gemt og
fredet, først i sit Hjem og saa hos sin Mand. Men _Livet_ gemte og
fredede ikke; det gav koldt og nøgternt hvert Menneske _sit_ Ansvar
og sin lille Lod i det store Land at opdyrke. Og _der_ skulde det
for hende blive anderledes. Hun havde ikke været nok for sin Dreng;
og hvorledes var hun udrustet til at være en Tilflugt og en kærlig
Vejleder for ham, naar det begyndte at spørge og undres dybt i ham!

Hun var i Grunden ogsaa en daarlig Hustru; -- aah ja -- vist var de
lykkelige; men hvorlænge kunde han have nok i den sommerlige, lette,
legende Forelskelse, som var Charmen i deres Ægteskab nu. Han, som
var saa alvorlig, og som daglig levede i saa megen Alvor.

I Begyndelsen var der saa mange Ting, som han vilde tale med hende
om; hun havde naturligvis gjort sig Umage for at høre efter, men
han mærkede med en Lydhørhed saa sart som en Kvindes, at Resonansen
i hendes Sind ikke klang ægte. I Virkeligheden _havde_ hun jo ikke
Interesse nok. Efterhaanden holdt han op at tale om den Slags Emner.

Selv havde hun lukket sig ude fra en Del af hans Sjæl. Men den Dag
skulde komme, da han, uden at ane hvorfor, igen af sig selv delte sin
Fortrolighed med hende.

-- De smaa dagligdags Bemærkninger, -- hvor det gør lidt ondt ikke at
faa Svar i samme Toneart, og den store fuldtklingende Fortrolighed,
hvor man bevidst, med Højtid, løfter Fligen for sin Sjæl. -- Tankerne
vældede ind paa hende. -- --

Hun vendte sig omsider og saa' efter Moderen, der sad med sit Barn,
men hvert Øjeblik urolig trak sit Uhr frem. Den unge Frue besluttede
-- paavirket af denne Dags Oplevelser, der havde virket paa hendes
sunde Begrebers Oprindelighed, som den kraftige Regn virker paa de
tilstøvede Planter, -- at sætte alt ind paa at vinde den Styrke,
som hendes Sjæl behøvede, og at holde sig borte fra det, som
overophidsede hendes Nerver og tærede paa hendes Kræfter; hun vilde
opnaa selv at kunne amme det Barn, som hun nu bar til Verden; hun
vilde ikke skaffe det Næring paa et andet lille Væsens Bekostning!

Hun betoges af en underlig tillidsfuld Længsel efter i et nært
dagligt Forhold til Gud at vinde Haab og vinde Styrke til i Sandhed
at blive en Opdrager og en Tilflugt for sit Barn. -- --

Heralda græd meget, da hun snart efter maatte sige Farvel til sin
Dreng, og misundeligt saa hun efter Konen, der stod med ham paa
Armen. Smaagrædende fulgtes hun med Fruen de Par Skridt hen til
Stationsbygningen.

Fruen gik saa underlig hjælpeløs overfor hendes Sorg. Naturligvis
.... det maatte jo være ganske forfærdeligt at skulle have sit
lille Barn ude blandt Fremmede ... og .. Synd for Barnet var det
selvfølgelig ogsaa ... men det hele var jo fra den anden Side set
ogsaa saa forkert ... og man maatte jo ikke glemme, at det var en
stor, stor Synd baade mod Gud og mod Samfundet at sætte et Barn
i Verden, naar Forældrene ikke var gifte og for altid bundne til
hinanden. Stor Synd, naar der ingen Rede var til at gemme det lille
Væsen i. Selv om den havde været nok saa fattig, -- det var dog det
eneste naturlige! ...

Men hun kunde ikke nænne at tale om Synd til denne unge, kønne,
bedrøvede Moder, der nu skulde bort fra sit Barn for at pleje og
passe et andet, hvis Forældre _betalte_ hendes moderlige Omsorg ...

Fruen satte sig ind i den 3dje Klasses Kupé til Pigen. De talte ikke
sammen, medens Toget fór af Sted.

Heralda sad og stirrede forgrædt og beklemt ud i Landskabet, som
Tusmørket slørede og gemte; kun engang -- da Fruen trøstende lagde
sin Haand paa hendes --, saa hun taknemmelig op. --

Da de igen stod i Byen, sagde Heralda:

»Her er nok ingen efter Fruen. Jeg kan vist godt naa at følge Fruen;
Fruen holder vel ikke af at gaa alene nu i Mørkningen; det er saa
glat paa Gaden.«

Saa gik de to bort sammen. --

»Sig mig nu ærligt Heralda. Hvor kunde det dog være --?«

»Jeg kan jo heller slet ikke forstaa det. -- Men man hørte jo saa
meget om alt det.«

»I mit Hus. Nej, Heralda, det har De rigtignok ingen Grund til at
sige!«

»Aah, Maren fyldte mig med væmmelig Snak, og det var altid, som det
var det eneste, at det _maatte_ komme dertil, for saadan gik det med
de fleste.«

»Sagde Maren det!«

Fruen blev tavs; hun tænkte paa, at hun i Eftermiddag havde sagt til
Maren, at hun tog rolig fra Manse, og at hun var saa glad ved, at de
kunde beholde hende til at hjælpe med at faa en flink og artig Gut ud
af ham.

Heralda fortsatte, hurtigt, som om det var hende om at gøre at faa
sig forklaret.

»Maren blev jo ved med at ville se min Kæreste, særlig efter at Trine
var rejst, og Joakim kom saa, naar Herren og Fruen var i Selskab. Men
Maren blev ved med alle sine Historier, og Joakim syntes, hun var saa
underholdende, og saa ... saa troede han vel, at han kunde byde mig
alt muligt, siden jeg ogsaa hørte paa al den Herregaardsraahed.«

»Men Heralda ... hvor kunde De ogsaa ... sammen med Deres Forlovede?«

»Jeg blev ogsaa vred, og jeg sad en hel Aften alene i Køkkenet, men
saa sagde han, at jeg var en Snerpe og en kedelig én, -- og han er jo
vant til fra Kjøbenhavn og Varieteerne, at alting skal være saa sjov;
og han er jo saa mageløs vittig selv.«

I det samme var der en fintklædt Herre af de forbidrivende
Promenerende, der halvt som i Vane strøg sig tæt op ad Heralda og
hviskede til hende.

»Der ser Fruen!« udbrød Heralda vredt. Og ganske fortvivlet og
haabløs udbrød hun:

»Det er da ogsaa, som Folk ikke tænker paa andet!«

»Heralda dog!«

»Ja, Fruen maa undskylde. Jeg mener det just ikke saadan. Men Fruen
kan tro, at vi simple Piger ser mere end saadanne som Fruen.«

De gik raskt af Sted, for Herren havde vendt sig og fulgte paa en
ubehagelig Maade tæt i Hælene paa dem.

Saa opdagede han, at han kendte Fruen. Han vendte sig og forsvandt.

Heralda begyndte igen:

»Joakim blev saa borte i lang Tid, jeg saa ham aldrig, og jeg vilde
jo nødig miste ham alligevel. Men saa den Dag, da Herren og Fruen var
til Deklarationsmiddag hos Etatsraadens, saa kom han. Og han havde
en Present med til Maren, men ingen til mig, og han var muggen og
tvær, naar jeg talte til ham, og han sagde, jeg elskede ham ikke. Og
det var en skrækkelig Aften, kan Fruen nok forstaa. Men saa Søndag
Eftermiddag kom han igen og gik lige ind paa mit Værelse til mig, og
han var ligesom i gamle Dage, og vi havde det saa godt og morsomt.
Jeg var saa forfærdelig glad, for jeg havde lige siddet og grædt, jeg
troede jo, det var helt forbi mellem os. Maren blev inde hos Manse
og blev der hele Aftenen. Og da han hørte, at Manse havde ondt for
Tænder, og at hun ikke kunde gaa fra ham, saa sagde han, at han ogsaa
helst altid bare vilde være ene sammen med mig, og saa meget andet
godt, sagde han, og han blev saa underlig ... og jeg ved ikke, hvad
der gik af mig ...«

Heralda bøjede Hovedet, men skottede halv trodsig, halv skamfuld hen
til Fruen ...

Men _hun_ hørte næppe efter mere; hun var dødtræt; Modløsheden var
paa engang kommen over hende; hun længtes usigeligt efter sin Mand
og sin hyggelige Krog i hans Arbejdsværelse ... hun kunde ikke bære
mere alene, kunde ikke rumme alle disse skarpe Modsætninger ... Aah,
hvile sig hjemme, rigtig hvile ud, medens han smaasnakkede muntert og
hyggeligt, bragte Ro i hendes Sind og fik hende til at glemme alle
triste Tanker ...

Mere koldt, end hun egentlig mente det, sagde hun Farvel til Heralda,
der skyndte sig hjem til det lune Barneværelse, hvor den fremmede
Dreng græd efter hende ...

Da Fruen kom ind, sad Maren og kyssede Manse, der sprællende hoppede
op og ned paa hendes Skød.

Trætheden svandt af Moderens Træk; hun gik hen og tog sin Dreng;
hendes Stemme dirrede lidt, da hun sagde:

»Jeg skal nok selv lægge ham i Seng i Aften.«

»Naa,« kom det fornærmet fra Maren, »saa ka' je' maaske gaa u'
me' min Kærreste, for je' er bleven forlouet me' Johansen hos
Matrialhandleri.«

       *       *       *       *       *

»Du ..«

Han vendte sig fra sit Arbejdsbord og nikkede glad til sin Hustru,
der saa frisk og munter ud.

»Ja, kære.«

»Jeg har gaaet saadan en lang og dejlig Tur i Dag igen. Og ved Du
hvad .. jeg .. jeg ..«

»Naa .. Du .. Du.« Doktoren gjorde spøgende Nar af hendes pludselige
Stammen.

Saa kom hun hen til ham, stod og støttede sig mod hans Stols Ryg.

Først da han lagde Hovedet helt tilbage og saa op i hendes Øjne,
bøjede hun sig ned til ham.

»Jeg er i en saa underlig, næsten overvældende lykkelig Stemning. --
Vejret var saa klart, -- jeg kan ikke glemme Heraldas Henrykkelse
over den gode Plejemoder, som Du har skaffet hendes Barn. -- Saa er
der Manse, som holder meget mere af mig, siden Maren er taget bort --
-- det hele, -- Du er jo ogsaa meget mere virkelig glad, end Du har
været --«

Hun rejste sig fra hans Knæ og sagde alvorligt:

»Du, maaske er det Synd af mig at være saa lykkelig -- saa mange ere
saa bedrøvede, og der er saa meget rent unaturlig forkert i Verden;
men Du ved ikke, hvor jeg er optaget af det Maal, jeg har sat mig.
Jeg _vil_ ikke give efter for min Svaghed. Vi _vil_ ikke mere have en
Fremmed ind til at være vort Barn nær. Vel?«

»Mange er jo nødt til det, og hvis --«

»Hvis, hvis. Nu ikke saa doktorklog, Du. Det er saa dejligt at haabe.
Jeg ved naturligvis nok, jeg er --«

»Forkælet, min egen Ven.«

»Hvem er det, der har forkælet mig allermest?« Hun lo til ham.

Saa drog noget større og alvorligere hen over dette blide, gratiøse.

Og hun løftede Hovedet og saa' stolt og ømt hen for sig:

»Har jeg faaet Lov at bære Barnet til Verden, maa jeg vel ogsaa kunde
opnaa selv at give det Næring, naar jeg ikke spreder og spilder mine
Kræfter.«




DØDEN OG BRÆNDEHUGGEREN.


Sneen falder og falder som i én Uendelighed. Den gemmer snart
Skovbundens gulvisne Straa; den ligger let paa Egepurlet, som endnu
bærer paa sit rødlige, sammenkrympede Løv, den hviler tungt og bredt,
i Flager paa de smaa Grantræer -- den falder roligt, som det aldrig
vilde høre op.

Brændehuggeren kløver Blok efter Blok, kvister de unge, fældede
Træer, hugger gennem de levende, saftfyldte Grene.

Hans Hue og Vams ere tunge af Sne; den siver fra Haaret ned mellem
Tørklædet og den runkne, røde Hals, ned paa Ryg og Skuldre; de vare
en Gang ranke og kraftige, nu ere de sammenfaldne og knoglede.

Store Fnug lægge sig paa hans Øjenlaag, han ser tungt op og blinker
træt til de smelte.

Sindigt og vanemæssigt lægger han Gren paa Gren til Dragten, som han
skal bære hjem til sin gamle Kone.

Han retter sig langsomt.

En Krage hopper hen over Sneen, og medens han slaar Hænderne i de
stivfrosne Vanter mod hinanden, ser han efter dens Spor, der bryder
Sneens ensformige Blødhed.

Saa giver han sig til at snøre Brændet sammen og slænger det op paa
Nakken.

Stien er næsten sneet til.

Han sukker og giver sig til at gaa, medens Snevandet siver ind i hans
Støvler, og Byrden tynger, saa det værker og smerter saa pinefuldt,
at han ikke kan tænke paa andet.

Med ét kaster han Dragten paa Jorden, lægger sig ned derover og
klynker Gang efter Gang:

»Gid jeg var død!«

»Gid jeg var død, saa elendig jeg er!«

Og medens han knuger Ansigtet mod sin Arm og sagte mumlende kalder
paa Døden, ser han utydeligt for sig vage Billeder fra Landsbykirken:
Herskabet i den vaabenprydede Stol, Mænds Nakker og Kvinders
Hovedsæt, udskaarne nøgne Engle, et rødt Skær fra Lysene op paa den
forgyldte Altertavle med Vrimlen af Figurer -- -- øverst oppe ved
Hvælvingen et strengt, koldt Øje.

Det Øje!

Han begynder at rejse sig, men hans tunge Støvler glide i den bløde
Sne, og han bliver liggende.

Ikke det Øje; nej, det vil han ikke tænke paa; han vil have i sit
Sind den Gud, der er Fattigmands Gud, og som bærer Lazarus ind til
Himlens Hvile og Varme.

»Gid jeg var død!«

Han vil ikke mere leve i den Elendighed, i det trælsomme Arbejde i
den lammende Kulde.

»Gid jeg var død!«

Sneen daler i store Flokke som i én Uendelighed. Brændehuggeren ser
sløvt og blændet ind i det. Pludselig slaar han sig for Panden, saa
Huen falder af, vil rejse sig, forvildet og knuget af Rædsel, men
bliver liggende paa Knæ med Hænderne foldede haardt mod Brystet.

Sneen kommer ikke mere som paa en lang, lang Rejse, falder ikke mere
med sagte Lyd paa de visne Blade, men staar stille og fylder Luften
med hvidt.

Den gamle Mand drejer Hovedet til den anden Side for at finde Frelse
fra denne forfærdelige Udslettelse af alt det Hverdagskendte.

Ogsaa der denne øde, blege Tavshed, denne fuldkomne Stilhed, hvor han
og hans Ønske og Kalden er det eneste.

Han vil berolige sig ved at tænke paa, at om en Stund kommer han hjem
... men hans Tanker flakke vildsomt og hjælpeløst, for han husker
ikke mere, hvorledes der ser ud i hans Stue.

Han raaber, men Tavsheden brydes ikke af noget Skrig; den staar lige
ventende med det store, alvorlige Spørgsmaal, for hvilket han ikke
kan døve sig med den vante Verdens smaa Hændelser.

Og dette har han selv kaldt paa i Trods mod Dødens og Livets Giver!

Han vil skrige, at han ikke har ment det, at han vil leve sit Liv,
saalænge Gud vil det; men saa bliver han med ét vild af Rædsel, og
Rædslen giver ham en stiv, kold, ustyrlig Kraft, og han farer frem og
hugger sin slidblanke Øxe ind i et levende Træ.

Men der er ingen Modstand og ingen Lyd.

Da synker han sammen med Hænderne for Øjnene og klynker saa usselt
som før:

»Aah, lad mig leve!«

-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --

Det lyder saa let, det er Snefnug, der falde paa Egepurlets Blade.

Med et hæst Raab, der klinger højt i al denne Sne, folder
Brændehuggeren de stive Hænder i én strømmende, svulmende
Taknemmelighed; og mumlende og takkende, endnu stønnende af Rædsel,
slænger han sin Dragt paa Nakken og stavrer afsted, saa han puster
tungt derved.

Hvert Øjeblik er han ved at falde, men ilfærdigt søger han atter
Fodfæste og skynder sig videre ad den snevre Sti, medens Fnuggene
blænde hans Øjne og Byrden tynger den krogede Ryg.

Da han er ude af Skoven, følger han ikke Vejen, som krummer sig
henimod Landsbyen, men han løber tvers over de tilsneede Marker ...
hjem, hjem!

Kun naa sit Hus, sætte sig til Ro paa Bænken ved Bordet, medens
hans Kone taler og med haarde Hænder løfter Gryden af Ilden, saa
den klirrer, og det høje Ur i Hjørnet dikker roligt og taktfast, og
Viseren gaar hen over Staalskiven. ... Brændehuggeren var nær falden
i en lille Bæk, som styrtede raskt og muntert af Sted. Isen havde
ikke kunnet dække og tæmme den, hvor ihærdigt den end Nat efter Nat
havde skudt sine naalespidse Krystaller ud fra begge Bredder.

Den gamle Mand steg over den og gik videre henimod det svage, rødlige
Skær, som kom fra hans Hus; Konen havde taget Gardinet bort, for at
han kunde have det hjemlige Lysskær at styre efter. -- -- -- --

De to Gamle spiste af det dampende Fad i Tavshed.

Brændehuggeren lyttede med hemmelig Fryd til Skeernes jævne Musik,
naar de strøges mod Fadet, og han saa glad og beroliget paa Ilden,
der flammede og slikkede i munter Uro om Træknuderne.

Da de gamle Folk laa i den brede Alkoveseng, sagde Konen, hvem
Mandens gode, milde Stemning havde gjort lykkelig og højtidelig:

»Naar nu Vorherre løser op for os to gamle. -- Til al sin Salighed!«
føjede hun til med bævende Stemme.

Og Manden foldede sine Hænder i stille Andagt.

-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --

Sneen falder som i én Uendelighed. Og mod Nattefrosten fører den
lille Bæk sin Kamp; den risler og mumler, medens den styrter af Sted
langs de isklædte Bredder, hvor om en Tid de blide Forglemmigejer
skal staa og se til den kraftige Kløver.




KAMMERJUNKEREN.


Der var et byggelystent Konsortium, som havde faaet Kig paa gamle
Kammerjunker von Bangs Ejndom, Carolinelyst, i Udkanten af Byen.

Der var Grund!

Selve Bygningen var rummelig og gammel, over hundrede Aar, der
var ikke saa lidt Gaardsplads og flere Udbygninger, og mellem
Vejen og Boligen laa en stor Have, der hidtil havde skjult alle
Herlighederne. Paa den anden Side af den private Vej, der førte op
til Stuehuset, laa en lang Strimmel Køkkenhave; i et Hjørne bag
Udhusene var der en upaaagtet Trekant Jord, som slet ikke var til
at kimse ad, naar den blev ryddet for al den Hyld og de forvildede
Rosen- og Stikkelsbærbuske, som groede filtret mellem hverandre. --
Hvor nu Gitterporten og en Afviser med »privat Vej« fredede, kunde
der lægges Gade, Jorden kunde stykkes ud, femetages Bygninger med
mange Smaalejligheder rejses -- der var bygget flere Fabrikker i
Nærheden, -- Bang var over syv og firs, Formue var der nok ikke mere,
Frøkenen var paa Døtreskolen hele Formiddagen, den gifte Datter
var Præstekone paa Jyllands Hede, -- -- det arbejdede i Konsortiets
ledende Hjærne, den gamle Kammerjunker havde søvnløse Nætter, og
omsider meldte Byens to Aviser da, at Carolinelyst var af Ejeren,
Kammerjunker v. Bang, solgt til et Konsortium bestaaende af osv.

Kammerjunkeren skulde være ude af Lejligheden inden Flyttedag.

-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --

En lys, solrig Morgen, lige i Begyndelsen af Oktober, stod Kirsten
i Carolinelysts store Køkken med en Kobbertemaskine i den ene Haand
og en Klud i den anden. Der var en fra Konsortiet inde hos hendes
Herskab i Forretninger, og det var Aarsag til, at hun var falden i
dybe Tanker, saa dybe, at en Kasserolle, der stod paa Skorstenen med
den rødstribede, smalle Sirtseskappe om, fik Lov at koge over.

»Jøsses! --« Kirsten fór til.

»Ja, vi ska' te arbe' me' et og tænke paa et a'et.«

En Dør gik ude i Entreen. Kirsten var straks til Stede og gjorde en
kølig Honnør for Konsortiets Repræsentant, en yngre, adræt Sagfører
med Cyclehue, halvrøget Cigar i Munden og Benklæderne spændt ind om
Anklerne.

Den gamle Herre fulgte ham helt ud paa Stentrappen, der med Opgang
fra begge Sider laa midt for Indgangsdøren; han bukkede høfligt,
Sagføreren lettede skødesløst paa Kasketten og sprang saa ned til
sin Cycle, som han ilsomt trak hen over de toppede Brosten til den
lukkede store Port.

»Spring ned, lille, og luk Porten op!« sagde Kammerjunkeren til
Kirsten.

»Der sku' vær' en Stads me' det Læs Tørv!« mumlede Kirsten; inden
hun havde naaet at parere Ordre, havde Sagføreren faaet Laagen i
Porten op, -- han skubbede Cyclen ud foran sig -- Kammerjunkeren saa
vedblivende høflig-oprømt ud, og Kirsten tænkte stolt og henrevet:
»Se til Knaabi[1], Ho'et op og ingen skæve Ben lige til det sidste!«

 [1] Knoppen.

Porten faldt haardt i, og saa var de to igen alene.

Kammerjunkeren gik ind i Entreen og tog sin Hat, Kirsten hjalp ham
Frakken paa.

»Frokosten er straks sæveret!«

»Tak Kirsten, jeg ska'nte ha.«

»Je' ku' ta' og lave Kammerjaankeri en Bi' Frekkedellehistaarie.«

»Tak, lille go'e, jeg ska'nte ha.«

»Det ka' Kammerjaankeri da tøgge me' en Solbærrom te'.«

»Jeg ska'nte ha', min rare Pige, tak. -- Jeg bliver her ved Huset?«

Kirsten stod og saa efter Kammerjunkeren, da han gik ned ad
Stentrappen, støttet til Jernrækværket med Aarstal 1805 og Navnetræk
H. F. S. og L. F. S. indrammet af Cirkler mellem de tynde, glatte
Stænger.

»Der er ikke maj rasia[2] mere i ham, det gamle Skind!«

 [2] Courage.

Saa gik Kirsten til sit Arbejde, og Kammerjunkeren vandrede rundt paa
Ejndommen.

Han var høj, tynd og rank; men af den gamle Kyrasserofficers
Spænstighed var der intet tilbage. De smaa Fødder i skinnende blanke,
lappede Sko syntes ligesom at søge Fodfæste, før de hvilede mod
Jorden; de smalle, rødlige Hænder støttede fast om Stokken. Frakken
var knappet lige op til det sorte Halstørklæde, som var vunden flere
Gange om Halsen og kun lod en smal Linje hvid Flip til Syne for
oven. Ansigtet var magert, velformet og rødligt. Det hvide Haar var
redt frem i Tindingerne, og Moustachen hang i en Bue ned om hans
Gammelmandsmund. --

Nu gik han sin sædvanlige Formiddagsrunde paa Ejndommen med den
overflødige Plads og de mange hyggelige Smaakroge; -- om en Maaned
var de ikke længere hans.

Den stille Gaard med de ujævne Brosten var omgiven af rødkalkede
Bindingsværksudhuse, hvor Vildvinen groede op over de røde
Teglstenstage. Ved Muren ind til Haven voksede et stort Kastanietræ;
mange brune, tørre Blade laa paa Jorden og rørte sig raslende, naar
et af de svage Vindpust naaede dem.

Der var en Mellemport, der stod aaben i Bygningen overfor Stuehuset;
den førte ind til en anden lille Gaard, hvor Stalden havde været.
Men det var mange Aar siden, at Kammerjunkerens Vogn havde rumlet
igennem den; den sidste halve Snes Aar havde han og Datteren levet
yderligt nøjsomt. Han opgav at ride og at holde Kusk, da han blev
nødt til at begynde at tage op af sin lille Kapital.

Nu var den næsten opbrugt, -- den gamle Herre havde ikke beregnet, at
han skulde blive saa gammel, derfor havde han solgt, -- og saa for
Børnenes Skyld, at de ikke skulde have det Bryderi, naar han var død.
--

Kammerjunkeren kom igen op ad Stentrappen.

Kirsten lyttede ude i Køkkenet: -- mon han vilde have Frakken af nu!
Nej, nu gik han ind i Stuen -- saa vilde han den Vej ud i Haven. --
Kammerjunkeren blev staaende og tog sig over Øjnene -- de hvidskurede
Gulve skinnede stærkt. Solen kom saa uhindret ind gennem de høje,
smaarudede Vinduer og blinkede som Glanslys paa buede Flader paa de
mørke, blanke Mahognimøbler med de mange fine, gule Indlægninger fra
hans Forældres Tid.

Mon Marie Frederikkes smaa Stiklinger henne ved Vindueskarmen taalte
al den Sol!

Det var vist bedst, han bad Kirsten rulle ned; -- han glemte det
straks igen; -- siden han havde anstrengt sig med at se Papirerne
saa nøjagtigt igennem, før han satte sit Navn under, løb Tankerne
underligt fra ham.

Han lukkede Havedøren i Gavlen op og traadte ud paa den store
Terrasse, der var saa bred som hele Huset, og hvor et Bord med Bænke
kun indtog en Krog.

Kammerjunkeren stod og saa udover Haven; Tujaer og Cypresser,
oprindelig sat som smaa Buske i Bede, ragede nu i Vejret som mørke
Pyramider om knudrede Stammer. En tavs, vims Fugl hoppede om i
Gangen, der bugtede sig ned i det tætte Buskads. I Plænen, hvor der
var mange smaa, hvide, uvedkommende Bellis, stod en Sandstensvase med
knækket Hank.

Kammerjunkeren gik nedad Trinene; Vedbenden havde trængt sig frem og
laa i lange Skud over de graa Sten.

Han gik forbi den straatækte Volière, der var tom, hen til det gamle,
forfaldne Lysthus, hvor Ranker og halvvilde Planter i én frodig
Fylde, som Efteraaret havde mærket, væltede sig ud over de Stænger,
der dannede Veranda foran Døren.

Gu' Fader i Himlen -- og alt dette skulde ryddes!

De kunde gerne have ladet ham dø først!

Kammerjunkeren vilde slippe for den Følelse, som nagede ham, og greb
derfor en flygtig Tanke, der ved Synet af Lysthuset gled igennem hans
Hjerne.

Det var her, de havde overrasket dem med at staa og synge --
Løjtnanterne og de nydelige Frøkner Krog -- den Aften -- ved
Assembleen, da Generalinden havde bedt ham føre Selskabet en
Promenade ned forbi Lysthuset.

Hvor længe kunde det vel være siden?

Generalinde Krog var død i to og treds og den Aften -- hvad Aar var
nu det? Det var et Par Dage efter Klubballet, da de havde maattet
give efter for Tiden og det ny og optage Byens største Skibsrheder
med Familie.

Da de valsede, havde Generalinden sagt paa sin uforlignelige Maade:

»Kammerjunker von Bang, i Aften er jeg med til Klubbens Begravelse.«

»Min Naadige mener?«

»De opfører sig jo meget net, disse Skipperdøtre, men -- det er dog
Skipperdøtre.« --

Kammerjunkeren gik videre.

Hvordan mon han var kommen til at tænke paa det nu?

Det var jo saa mange, mange Aar siden, dengang alt var helt
anderledes end senere. --

Da von Bang var ude af Tjeneste og boede i Ro paa Carolinelyst, havde
han af et godt Gemyt og med et praktisk militært Greb taget fat paa
Velgørenheden, sammensmeltet forskellige Foreninger og bragt System
i dem. Han arbejdede selv meget, undersøgte med minutiøs Omhu, førte
omfangsrige Regnskaber med mange Bilag og kunde til enhver Tid bringe
paalidelige Oplysninger.

Kammerjunkeren færdedes i den Anledning ofte paa Gaden og havde mange
at hilse. Og ingen hilste saa ærbødigt og fuldendt smukt som den
gamle Kavaller.

Velgørenhedsværket, der hver Dag førte Kammerjunkeren ind til Byen,
gav om Aftenen ham og Datteren Stof til lange, jævnt glidende
Samtaler.

Datteren, -- hvem Troen paa, at Lykkens lunefulde Spil ikke leger
med Sjæle, havde gjort blid og taalmodig, -- var i nær og hjærtelig
Forbindelse med de smaa i Søndagsskolen, og den særegne Evne hun
havde til overalt at finde formildende Omstændigheder, hjalp over de
Gærder af Ærgelse og Haabløshed, som enkelte Klienters Drukkenskab og
Løgnagtighed højnede for Kammerjunkerens Fod. --

Men det var ikke nogle af den Slags Sorger, som i denne Morgen
slappede den gamle Herres Træk, medens han trippede rundt i sin
Have, hvor Vedbenden kravlede i de høje, gamle Træers øverste Grene,
hvor Buskadserne var brede og tætte som Underskov, og hvor Mosset i
Gangene kun i Midten var delvist afslidt.

Der var kommen en underlig Lammelse over ham, og dog drev en indre
Uro ham rundt overalt paa hele Ejendommen.

Af og til lukkedes et af Vinduerne i den høje Stueetage paa Klem, og
Kirsten kigede ud efter den gamle Herre, der gik saa ilsomt, men saa
besværligt.

»Der er Slu'er i Valsen i Dau! Bare Frøkenen snart kommer a' Skole!«
tænkte hun og sukkede, saa det knagede i Hægterne paa den brune
Hvergarnskjole.

Kammerjunkeren kom ind i Stuen. Hvor han var træt!

Uvilkaarligt gik han den vante Vej hen til Lænestolen bag
Blomsterbordet.

Han satte sig, fik Benet lagt op paa Gyngeskamlen, Tæppet, der laa
parat, bredt over Benene, Armen støttet mod Vindueskarmen. Den gamle
Herre aandede dybt. Det gjorde godt at komme til Ro paa den vante
Plads.

Næsten straks rejste han sig uroligt igen.

Der var saa meget, han skulde have udrettet. Først og fremmest maatte
han nu begynde at tænke paa, hvilke af Møblerne han bedst kunde
skille sig af med .... dem alle fik de jo ikke Plads til, naar de nu
flyttede ind i en ny Lejlighed.

Han gik rundt i Stuen, men syntes ikke, han kunde bestemme sig.

Den Stol havde hans Fader selv sat frem til ham den ene Gang, han kom
hjem -- træt af den lange Køretur -- i Besøg fra Landkadetakademiet.

I den Sofa sad hans Hustru, da de, ved Juleselskabet hos hans
Forældre, blev forlovede.

Nej, det var bedst at begynde inde i Havestuen.

Kammerjunkeren standsede ved et lille, tyndbenet Bord, hvor der stod
en indrammet Blyantsskitse, som højsalig Kong Frederik den Syvende
havde tegnet og foræret hans Kone. Paa Væggen over det hang et
Billede af Kongen i rød Fez, blaa Vaabenfrakke og hvide Benklæder.
-- Farverne løb i et for Kammerjunkerens Øjne.

Gu' Fader i Himlen, han vidste nok, hvad det betød, -- i Nat havde
hans salig Kone vist sig for ham, som da Wilhelmines Barn døde ovre
i Jylland.

Ja, ja, ja -- Marie Frederikke blev ene. Hvis hun havde taget
Ritmesteren i sin Tid; ak ja. Men hun vilde jo ikke.

Saa havde _han_ ogsaa været en ensom, gammel Mand i alle disse Aar.

Inde i den anden Stue stod Kirsten og bearbejdede to daddelløse
Messingdørhaandtag, saa at Solen skinnede med hvidgule Blink i det
riflede blanke og i den vaceformede Topfigur, naar hun drejede sig
lidt bort for at se efter Kammerjunkeren.

Nu kom han igen stavrende ind og gik frem og tilbage mellem Datterens
Sybord i Vinduesfordybningen og det gamle, lave Klaver, der saa let
kom til at klirre.

»Hva' lysser Kamerjaankeri etter?« Kirsten mente, det var paa Tide at
faa en Ende paa denne urolige Vandren om.

»Jeg rører mig kun en Smule, Kirsten, en Smule.«

»Ve' Kamerjaankeri ikke ha' Kaffen herind? Je' har den te'reds.«

»Tak Go'e, jeg ska'nte ha' noget.«

Kirsten stod lidt. Det gik vel ikke an længere at sysle med
Dørlaasene.

»Ja--a, -- saa maa je' vel se at faa mig flyttet te' mit.«

Kirsten gik.

Kammerjunkeren satte sig i Lænestolen ved det midterste Vindue og saa
ud i Haven, hvor Flaget vajede paa halv Stang, og alle de brune og
gule Blade hang stille i den klare, rene Luft; der kom kun Bevægelse,
naar et løsnede sig og langsomt dalede nedad.

Med tynd Klang slog Uhret henne paa Konsollen ti.

Kammerjunkeren lukkede Vinduet paa Klem.

Lidt efter begyndte Klokkeklangen fra alle Byens Kirker at komme
sejlende med deres store, skønne Alvor og fylde Stuen med Vemod og
Højtid.

Klokkerne oppe over de travle Gader ringede, fordi Dronning Louise
laa Lig paa Bernstorff.

Kammerjunkerens Tanker, der i denne Morgen var springske og
uberegnelige, gik pludselig langt tilbage i Tiden.

Han saa Dronningen foran sig, som hun ved Sølvbryllupet kom vandrende
gennem Christiansborgs pragtfulde Sal ved Kongens Arm fulgt af
Slægten. Kammerjunkeren havde dengang et Øjeblik glemt Dronningen for
at se paa Kvinden -- hendes Bevægelsers Skønhed, hendes Øjes Liv og
Munds Smil.

Og nu laa hun saa urørlig stille blandt alle Blomsterne paa
Bernstorff. Ja, ja, Tiden gaar, og meget forandres. Hans gamle Gaard
rives ned, hans Jord stykkes ud, og han selv rejser bort.

Tiden, alles strenge Herre.

Tiden -- gaar --. Ti--den -- gaar. -- -- Kammerjunkeren havde blundet
lidt.

Nu vaagnede han og lyttede forundret til de dybe, rungende Klokkeslag.

Han var iskold, men tænkte ikke videre paa det, for -- hvor de
Klokker ringede!

Marie Frederikke skulde dog ogsaa høre dem. Nu ringede de sagtere og
sagtere og steg højere og højere op i Luften.

Han forstyrrede ikke Klokkeklangen, naar han vinkede ganske stille ad
hende. Han løftede Armen, men den hang slapt ned, som tynget af Bly.
Langsomt og saa dejligt ringede de, men sagtere og sagtere; nu maatte
hun komme, ellers fik hun dem ikke at høre, -- de var saa højt oppe.

Besværligt drejede han Hovedet ind mod Stuen.

Rummet var skinnende lyst, og det lille Tæppe inde under Midterbordet
var langt, langt borte.

Men nu sank han dybt i lune, bløde Dun; det blev saa mørkt, som om en
lagde sin Haand over hans Øjne; han forsøgte at løfte Hovedet for at
lytte -- Klokkerne -- de ringede dejligt, men saa svagt.

-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --

Senere drejedes Laasen, Døren lindedes forsigtigt paa Klem, og
Kirsten paa Hosesokker stak Hovedet inden for.

Saa slap hun Døren og løb hen til sin gamle Herre, der sad i sin
Lænestol og var død.

Andægtig blev hun staaende, medens Taare efter Taare gled ned over de
runde, røde Kinder, og Snøft efter Snøft brød Stilheden.

Omsider sagde hun langsomt og inderligt:

»Herregu', det var da ny'eligt, han ku' dejse af inden Flyttedau!«

Hun tørrede sin Haand i Forklædet og trykkede med kærlig Omhu
Kammerjunkerens Øjne til.




DEN DRISTIGE.


Aarets sidste Timer randt langsomt ud i den uendelige Ensomhed.

Inden Døre søgte Menneskene sammen -- Frænder og Venner, Husbondsfolk
og Tyende, Lavsbrødre og Landsknægtenes hjemløse Skarer.

Men en var alene inden for Stadens brede Mure.

Det var en ung Kvinde, der sad i et Kammer øverst oppe under det
røde, spidse Tag paa en af de ældste Gaarde.

Bysvenden, der stod ved Porten den Dag, hun kom dragende, fik at
vide, at hendes Navn var Audacia. Ellers kendte ingen hende, og ingen
frittede, naar hun ærbart gik sin Gang til Brønden eller til Kirken.
--

Audacia stod ved Kammervinduet, som aabnede sit lille, trekantede Øje
højt oppe over Karnapper og brede Gadetrapper midt paa det store Tag.

Set gennem det grønne, tykke Glar, der sad rundt og fast mellem
Blyet, blegnede Stjernerne til sære, formummede Blink.

Derfor slog hun Vinduet op og holdt sit Ansigt hen mod den friske
Luftstrøm, der vældede ind fra den frostklare Nat.

Længe saa hun ud over de mange snedækkede Tages stejle Skraaninger
med brede, rygende Skorstene og hvide Snebaand paa Trappegavlenes
Trin.

Hendes Blik gled ned i den snevre Gyde, der overfor hendes Vindue
mundede ud paa Torvet.

Ved Bislag og Vinduesskodder var der tynde Lysstriber. Klang af
Menneskestemmer, Instrumenter og klirrende Tinkander ringlede fra
Værtshuset ud i Luften; der stod en Halvdør paa Klem lige under
den skiltende Krone, som hang urørlig og snepudret i den snørklede
Jernarm.

Men om Torvebrønden stod ingen sladrende og leende Piger, ingen
steg op ad Kirkens brede Stentrin, ingen gik forbi dernede med
lygtebærende Tjenere.

Alle var inden Døre med dem, som Livet havde stillet dem nær.

Ingen sov den Nat.

Alle ventede det ny Aar. Ventede, at dets første Minut skulde dale
med Klokkeklangen ned over deres gamle By.

Alle var inden Døre, for kun der kunde Narrebjælderne rasle og støje
og overdøve den sælsomme, uvante Spørgen og Manen, der besatte
Sindene, saasnart der blev stille. --

Gennem et Vindue i Borgmesters pyntelige Gavl kunde Audacia se ind i
Salen, hvor Raadmændene var bænkede om brede Borde og tømte Vinen af
ærværdige Rømere.

Ingen sov i denne Nat. Alle ventede Indtoget af det ny Aar, som
maaske i sit Følge havde alt godt efter enhvers Begær.

Saadan havde de ogsaa ventet for et Aar siden, ventet hos
Borgmesters, i Lavshusene, i Kipper og lune Stuer og fattige Boder
Byen over.

Ventet længselsfuldt.

Audacias Øjne funklede!

_Kunde_ hun gemme hele Verden i en lun Favn, hvor Sorger og Nød kun
drog forbi som store, fjerne Skyer!

Kunde hun give sit Brysts Varme til Ly for al Kulde og Kval! --

De havde sunget og jublet i Glansen af den store Forventning. Den
dyreste Hyldest, den mest troende Tillid havde de ødslet paa det
kommende Aar.

Men det havde bragt mangen ung Jomfru Sot og beske Lægedrikke i
Stedet for Brudgom og Bryllupsgilde, mangen værdig Borger Forlis paa
Gods og Ære, mangen tapper Krigsknægt Lemlæstelse og Død for Bytte og
lystige Plyndringstog.

Og nu ventede de igen! Ventede, medens de jublede og pokulerede for
at døve deres Øren for den alvorsfulde Manen, der sivede ind fra den
store, tavse Nat, der laa som en Jernarm om deres Verden.

Men der var vel ogsaa dem, der ventede i en Længsel, som neppe kunde
drive Timerne paa Dør, og som gjorde Nætterne lange som Uger, ventede
paa en Lykke, der kunde sprænge Tungsindets svære Fængselsporte,
lyttede efter trøstende Svar paa alle hemmelige Suk og angstfulde
Spørgsmaal. Ventede med samme Længsel som de andre Aar, men med
sygere Haab!

Audacias Medfølelse slog ud i Lue.

Aah, om hun kunde frelse dem fra al lidelsesfuld Uvished om den
Herre, som holdt for Porten for at ride inden for Bymuren, naar
Midnatsklokken slog.

Hendes Blod brændte.

Knugende Syner stod for hendes Blik:

Ensomme, angstfulde, bøjede Mennesker, der med deres Sjæls sidste
Kraft higede efter et læskende Haab.

Hærstore Flokke, der forvirret og smerteligt uklart længtes efter den
Haabets Ild, der skulde smelte Sløvhedens og Forhærdelsens Lænker om
deres tyngede Sind.

Skare efter Skare, der som Tiggere saa ind i Fremtiden!

Da fór en altforglemmende Trang til Klarhed over den kommende Tids
Dunkelhed som en viljehærdende Ild igennem hende.

Ud i den tavse, hvide Nat? Sprænge alle Rimelighedens Skranker!
Opsøge det, som omspændte Verden for at sænke sig over den ved Midnat!

Vriste Visheden fra _Tiden_ selv!

Audacia steg hastigt ned ad de mange Trapper, ilede gennem snevre
Gyder til en forglemt Laage i Bymuren; hun vred i den rustne Slaa,
til den gav efter, og hun trængte sig gennem snetunge, filtrede,
tørre Ranker, til hun stod udenfor Byens hegnende Værn.

Hvidt og øde laa Landet foran hende.

Og den mørke Himmel lukkede som et fast, stjerneprikket Hvælv
derover, et natligt Hvælv uden en eneste fattig Stribe af den sunkne
Sols Guld.

Audacia kastede sig ud i Mørket som i et Hav af Fare. Menneskenes
Sorger knugede hende. Menneskenes Længsler skar i hende, og hele
hendes Sind var fyldt af mægtig Kærlighed til de, som angstfulde
stirrede ind i den kommende Tid.

Hun ilede frem i Mørket. Kulden strammede sig haardt sammen om hendes
Legeme -- hun ejede ikke et Vaaben mod Vilddyrene, hun kendte ikke
Sti over den vide Hede eller gennem de mørke Kløfter, men endnu
havde hun ikke mødt den store tavse Hersker, _Tiden_, der ene kunde
bringe Lys, og derfor ilede hun frem, saa ustandseligt, som om den
Medlidelse, der brændte i hende, kunde bære som Vingepar.

-- Før Midnat stod Audacia ved Tidens Borg.

Saa truende sælsom rejste den sig i Mørket, at hun i Rædsel løb og
løb, flygtende fra det Maal, hun havde higet imod med en Vilje, der
havde været stærkere end alle Hindringer. Audacia piskede sit Mod med
Selvforagtens hvasseste Svøbe, men Rædslen jog hende vildt paa Flugt.

Da mindedes hun, at i Billedsniderens Stue sad en ung Hustru og
ventede. Paa fjerde Aar -- ensom mellem Værktøj og halvfærdige
Helgenbilleder og indtørrede Lerklumper, ventede paa Mesteren selv,
der vandrede gennem fjerne Lande for i et varmere Sollys at suge
Lykke ind i sin tunge Kunstnersjæl.

Paa fjerde Aar! Og i Nat sad hun i Mesterens Stol ved Ilden og
vaagede; med Ære vilde hun tage mod den Gæst, som maaske skulde
bringe den lykkelige Gensynstime.

Atter ildnede Medlidelsen Audacia; den kolde Angst veg, og modigt
søgte hun tilbage til Tidens Borg.

Over en svajende Bro, gennem den lange mørke Port, hvor Lyden af
hendes lette Trin slog hult og forstærket mod Hvælvingen, naaede hun
ind i Borgen.

Usynlige Rædsler holdt Vagt i hver Krog. Skræmmende Stemmer truede
bag hver Dør. Klam og solforladt strøg Luften over hendes Ansigt og
Hænder.

Audacia tænkte paa Billedsniderens unge Hustru, og hun famlede sig
modigt frem ad snevre Gange og stejle Trapper, der vindede sig opad
i knugende Mørke.

Tilsidst stødte hendes fremstrakte Hænder mod en Dør, der gav efter
for deres Tryk og langsomt drejedes, medens et gulblegt Lys spredte
sig som et Straalebundt ud mod hende.

Audacia traadte ind i et dybt Rum. Ned fra den skyggede Hvælving
hængte mærkelige Dyr i svære Tov, og Dunkelheden i Krogene dækkede
over hemmelighedsfulde Instrumenter og lænkede, tykke Bøger.

Foran det store Ildsted saa hun Ryggen af den, hun saa møjsomt havde
søgt, -- _Tiden_ selv. Bøjet og hvidhaaret syslede han med Kolber og
Digler og alskens sært skinnende og boblende Væsker.

Paa Timeglasset sad en blind Ravn; den slog med Vingerne, da Audacia
skød Døren til.

Han vendte sig fra Ilden.

Det ældste, det uudgrundeligste, som ej nævnes kan, aabenbaredes i
disse tankehærdede Træk, i dette hvasse Blik under den mægtige Pandes
hvide Kant.

Audacia lukkede sine Øjne og lagde Haanden over dem. Thi den Visdom,
som straalede imod hende fra dette Aasyn, sved i hende.

Men hun æggede sit Mod ved at tænke sig staaende ved Bybrønden,
skænkende modige Mænd og Kvinder Visheden i Bytte for den usle,
løgnagtige Forventning.

Og hun spurgte med al den Kraft, som hendes hede, barmhjærtige Vilje
skabte.

Han løftede Haanden, saa det sorte Ærme faldt tilbage. Myndigt pegede
han mod en lav Dør inderst i Hvælvingen:

»Vent der, sammen med de Svende og Terner, som jeg vil sende ud over
al Verden i Midnatstimen!«

Audacia traadte ind i et mørkt Rum.

Hun famlede sig frem langs Panelet, fulgte det, da det drejede om et
Hjørne ind i en Vinduesfordybning.

Det puslede og lo, stønnede og raslede i alle Stuens Kroge.

Der var ingen snelys Mark at skimte gennem Ruden.

Audacia aandede paa den, men Isen smeltede ikke. Hun lagde sine varme
Læber mod Isblomsternes tomme Kalke, men de veg ikke, der var ingen
Lysning i dette tætte Mørke.

Da aabnede _Tiden_ Døren og traadte ind. Foran paa den sorte Talar
holdt han en Lygte; igennem dens Hornruder flimrede et dunkelt Skær
op om hans hvide Skæg og stærke Aasyn.

Audacia spurgte atter modigt.

Den ældgamle svarede:

»Vent, til min Herre byder mig at tale.«

Og han satte Lygten, gik bort og lukkede Døren.

Det gule, dunkle Skær gled videre og videre ud, blev klarere og
klarere, indtil den store Hal straalede som i Lyset af tusinde Kærter.

Hallen var fuld af sælsomme Skikkelser, _Tidens Svende_ og _Terner_.

En bredskuldret, muskelstærk Mand nærmede sig hende.

Med kloge, rolige Ord fortalte han Navnene paa Tidens Budbringere.

Selv hed han _Erfaring_.

Audacia saa ikke længe paa den lyse _Lykke_, det vidunderskønne
_Haab_, hvis Ansigt straalede af Mod og Godhed, eller paa det blide
_Taalmod_ med de ædle, kraftige Skuldre og de favnende, støttende
Arme.

Det var de rædselsfulde, gruopvækkende Skikkelser, som mest drog
hendes Blik.

Bag _Misundelses_ gustne, onde Fjæs øjnede hun _Pestens_ sorte,
stinkende, blinde Hoved. _Mordbrands_ hadefulde Øjne flakkede
usikkert, hans filtrede Haar hang ned om den lave, dyriske Pande og
ideligt klemte han Læben sammen om de brede Tænder, der gned mod
hverandre.

Det ubarmhjærtige _Uvejr_ støttede sin stærke Krop mod den
haardhændede, knoglede _Sult_. _Skuffelsens_ visne, sammenkrogede
Skikkelse sneg sig om ved Siden af _Ligegyldighedens_ fede, oppustede
Krop, der trampede frem uden at se, hvor den ødelæggende satte sine
brede Fødder.

Audacia bævede. Hvilket Under maatte der ikke ske, hvis Menneskene
skulde bevare deres Sjæle i en Verden, hvor der truede saadanne
Farer. Hun krympede sig i den mørkeste Haabløshed; Fortvivlelsen
flængede i hendes Sind. Hvert Pulsslag raabte jo Haan mod Menneskenes
Afmagt og Forsvarsløshed. --

Da veg alt hos hende for en pludselig skabt vild Trang til at
udslette sin egen Sjæl, tvinge den til at briste som en Boble, der
intet Spor efterlader sig.

I denne Nød skete det, at hun modstandsløst maatte se op! Den skønne,
værdige Kvinde, hvis Navn var _Taalmod_, stod foran hende og sænkede
lindrende og smeltende sit Blik i hendes, til Sindets vilde Haardhed
var borte.

Audacia saa op i den Mægtiges Øjne; der luede kraftfuld, kærlig Alvor
og modig Godhed, der ikke var greben med Lethed i et Øjeblik for at
slippes i det næste, men vunden i haarde Stormløb og baaren frelst ud
af svidende Smerter.

Audacia fyldtes af ny Kraft, og hun vendte sig atter mod de
frygtelige Skikkelser for at uddrikke den Erfarings Skaal, som raktes
hende. --

_Selvforgudelsen_ knejsede hos sin Tvillingebroder, den lave,
vraltende, snaksomme _Dumhed_.

_Ukærligheden_ havde sat sin plumpe Fod paa Nakken af en skøn Dreng,
_Glæden_, der, lykkelig ved Kamp, spændte sit unge, ædle Legeme under
den raa Byrde.

Som et lurende, begærligt Dyr stod _Ondskabens_ behændige Skikkelse
paa Spring, rede til at fare løs paa enhver, som den kunde naa.
Bagved -- bange for sit Skind -- gemte den gustne, vanskabte
_Bagtalelse_ med de flakkende Øjne sig.

En mæsket, lavpandet Skikkelse, _Dovenskaben_, gik rundt og havde
venlige Ord til alle. Men med Rædsel saa Audacia, at hvor han nærmede
sig, smuldredes Træet og søndredes Gulvets og Murens Sten; den vimse
_Ihærdighed_ og den tavse, stærke _Hjælpsomhed_ arbejdede med Hast i
hans Spor, at ikke Hallen skulde styrte sammen om dem alle.

_Mistænksomhed_ krøb sammen i en ensom Krog og rugede beængstet over
sin Giftflaske.

Med sammenbidte Læber og blodunderløbne Øjne sad _Vold_ hos den
vindtørre _Gerrighed_, der fredløs og ængstelig holdt med sine lange,
knoglede Fingre om sin Broder _Volds_ blodplettede Arme.

Men opad Væggen og henunder Hvælvingen lysnede et Genskin af
_Dødens_, _Sandhedens_ og _Kærlighedens_ mægtige Herskerskikkelser,
der svævede ude i den stjernelyse Nat, rede til at lyde _Tidens_ Bud.

Og _Indignationen_, en ungdomsfrisk, skøn Mand med varme, faste Øjne
og et staalblankt Spyd i sin kraftige Haand stod som en frygtløs Helt
midt inde blandt alle de onde Skikkelser.

_Løgnagtigheden_ sneg sig rundt sammen med en dukket, vrikkende
Kvindeskikkelse, _Sledskeriet_; de sluttede Venskab med hver som gad;
deres hvidgule Ansigter var stivnede og udtryksløse, og deres syge,
væmmelige Hænder besudlede, hvad de rørte ved. Med løgnagtig venlige
Lader nærmede de sig Audacia; hendes Hjærte nagedes af Smerte over
dette Misbrug af ædelt jordisk Væsen; nu stod de hende nær, og Flokke
af Ord om Godhed og Troskab udgik fra dem.

Da flygtede Audacia sjæleangst ind til den Ældgamle, som Gud havde
sat til Hersker over disse forfærdelige Budbringere.

Stor og ubevægelig stod han foran Baalet paa Ildstedet. Han sagde:

»Hør da, hvorhen mine Svende og Terner efter min Herres Bud skal
drage, i hvilke Hjærter de skal trænge ind, i hvilke Hjem de skal
tage Hæderspladsen!«

Bønfaldende strakte Audacia Armene ud:

»Din Herre tilgive mig, og tilgiv Du min formastelige Spørgen. Jeg
beder Dig af hele mit Hjærte, lad ikke mig, lad ingen vide, hvem Du
vil sende ind i vor By i det ny Aars Følge. Straf ikke min Oprørskhed
mod Din store Herres Verdensordning med Viden om de kommende Ting!«

Og i dybeste Bevægelse sank hun ned foran den Ældgamle.

Da aabnede han Døren, kaldte paa _Taalmod_ og pegede paa Audacia.

Den skønne, mægtige Kvinde løftede hende i sine Arme og gik ud af
Døren. Langsomt gik hun frem, Mørket kløvede sig som to vigende
Bølgerækker for den dæmpede Klarhed, der kronede hendes alvorlige
Pande.

Hen under Stjernehimlen bar hun det trætte Menneske mod Hjemmet.

Audacias Hjærte slog stille mod _Taalmods_ roligt aandende Bryst; der
dalede en forunderlig mild Kraft ned over hende fra disse alvorligt
glade Øjne, der snart saa vidt og ømt ud over Jorden, snart fæstede
sig i stille, længselsfuld Lykke mod Stjernebillederne paa den
fjerne, mørke Himmel. -- -- --

Det gamle Aars sidste Øjeblik veg bort.

En bølgende, mangfoldig rungende og klingende Toneskare svang sig ud
over Staden fra alle dens høje Taarne.

_Taalmod_ skred ind i den ensomme Stue oppe under Taget; Ilden
flammede lysnende op, og usynlige Blomster duftede sødt og stærkt.

Klokkeringningen hørte op. Men Luften bar en Stund paa Lyden, der
bævede sagte og tonende.

Audacias hele Sind favnede med ydmyg Undren om den dybe Fred og
Fortrøstning, som var givet hende som en kostelig Gave.

Hun fornam Visheden om, at den, der havde baaren hende over de døde,
kolde Snesletter, kunde beskærme mod alt det, som ødelæggende sneg
sig ind paa Menneskene, løb Storm mod deres Fred og gjorde deres Maal
lave og deres Verden snever og kold. Og Audacia bad:

»Kom til mig, naar min Sjæl knuges af Mørket, saa den fattig og
afmægtig glemmer Lyset! Kom til mig, Du, som er størst af alle Tidens
Sendebud!«

Taalmod svarede:

»Min Gerning er kun at bane Vej til Menneskenes Hjærter for dem, som
er større end jeg, og som evner at skænke det Højeste.«

Som et svindende Billede stod den lyse Skikkelse i Døraabningen. Saa
ædelt, saa mildt som dæmpet Spil over Strenge tonede hendes sidste
Ord:

»Kald paa mig, og jeg kommer!«




KAPTAJNENS DATTER.


Solskin over toppede, smaa Bølger, over den nybyggede, hvidmalede
Skonnertbrig, der glider langsomt gennem Sundet ud fra den fynske
Søkøbstad med det ene Kirketaarn og de mange røde Tage; Solskin, der
faar selve Røgen fra den lille Damper, der slæber Skonnerten ud, til
at se munter ud, Solskin over Vimpler og Flags rødt og hvidt, over de
feststemte Mennesker ombord og de skovklædte Kyster og de grønne Øer.

Skonnertbriggens Kaptajn er en stor lyshaaret og lysskægget Mand med
skarpe, blaa Øjne og en vældig Latter, der i Dag hvert Øjeblik faar
Lov til at runge; han er glad i disse Timer, befinder sig saa vel
i sin Rolle som Vært for Rhedere med Familie og Venner, der følge
Sundet ud og senere vil tage tilbage med den lille Slæber.

Ude i det fjerne ligger Havet! Havet, hvor han skal vise, at han
er den dristigste af alle Byens og Øernes Kaptajner; han forstaar
lige saa godt at tumle Negrene, der paa Kysten af Afrika hjælpe
med Indladningen af Palmeolie, som Consulen i Liverpool og Folkene
ombord.

Og saa er der det ... han kniber det ene Øje lidt sammen, medens det
blinker lunt i det andet ... at Mutter skal med Gæsterne tilbage.

Vist holder han af sin Kone ... men nu har han gaaet hjemme et halvt
Aar, drevet om ved Skibsbyggeriet og smaaskændtes med Mester ...
taget et Glas med gode Venner, og ikke altid har han havt let ved at
bøje sig under Mutters Tugt og de ensformige Smaastadsforhold. Derfor
er der noget lokkende i dette: igen at skulle ud alene, være fri for
Sludder baade fra den ene og fra den anden Kant ... ud at besøge hans
sorte Majestæt i Afrika, ud til ensomme, drømmende Timer i Kahytten,
naar Passaten fylder »Neptuns« tyve svulmende Sejl.

Ensomme Timer!

Ja. -- Stemningen slaar med ét om, og Vemoden kruser hans Sinds Glæde
som en Iling en lys, blank Flade.

Saa skal han ikke se Kone og Barn i flere Aar. Og i den Tid skal
Pigebarnet konfirmeres.

Han vilde nok have været hjemme den Dag, gaaet ved hendes Side op
ad Kirkegulvet, hørt hendes Svar til Præsten og senere -- i en
Kreds af Slægt og Venner -- udtalt noget af det, som vilde fylde
hans Hjærte paa en saadan Dag, hvor hans eneste Barn traadte ind
til Livets Sorger og Fristelser og selv overtog Ansvaret for sine
Handlinger. Aah, hun skulde nok klare sig! Saadan en dansk, kærnesund
Sømandsdatter; for det var hun; smuk og høj, lys og kæk, ikke
bange for et oprigtigt Svar, naar han havde faaet lidt for meget
af Disciplinen med hjem i de smaa, sirlige Stuer ... men god og
hjælpsom, rask paa Hænderne og flink til Læsning. Se, hvor net hun nu
staar og taler med Konsulinden; -- nu lægger hun Shawlet om den gamle
Dames Skuldre, -- Hans Holgersen henter en Pøs, der kan bruges som
Skammel.

Ham har han selv taget sig af de Par Aar, Knægten har faret til
Søs. Det er ikke blot pæne Manerer, han har lært ham, men ogsaa
Sømandsskab. Og det, saa det kan forslaa: -- den Jungmand kan skære
boven Læsejls Fald bedre end mangen Matros og lægge en Stikbout, der
nok skal dy sig for at glide under Raaen.

Ja, Gu' forstaar Kaptajn Martin Frederiksen at faa Skik paa sine
Gutter og Orden i sit Skib. ... Vent nu bare, til han kanske om nogle
Aar faar et større med Salon, Piano, Sovekahytter og Badekammer.
Saa kan han ha' Passagerer med. Det kunde jo hænde, at der blandt
dem var en ung, smuk Dame, som særlig blev ham anbefalet; -- hun
vil forbavses over, hvor Kaptajn Frederiksen er en dannet Mand med
Interesser, en Mand, med hvem man kan underholde sig ... Saa giver
hun ham sit Billede til Afsked og Tak. Han hænger det paa Væggen i
sin Kahyt, og Toldembedsmænd og Faktoribestyrere sidde og forelske
sig i det, naar de komme ombord hos ham ... Han skal vide at være den
sikre Beskytter, den ærlige, jævne Sømand mod en hvilkensomhelst
ung Lady, der betror sig til ham og hans Skib. Bærer han dog ikke
-- trods alle sine mange og store Fejl -- en Stræben i sig mod »det
store Ubekendte«.

Saaledes kalder han det, som han stadig tror paa og beder til, men
ikke mere vil kalde ved det Navn, han brugte, da han var Barn. --
Han rives ud af sine Drømmerier, idet én slaar ham klaskende paa
Skulderen:

»Du er da 'tte søsyg, Kaptajn? Du ser saa spekulativ u'!«

»Sikken et Vejr, Jensen, se paa de hvide Skyer og se, hvor Solen
skinner derinde paa Kirkegavlen og Rugmarken paa Bakken!«

»Ja, det begynder at blive lunkent; jeg sve'er Tran i min
Søndagsjakke.«

»Aah, Du er en født Prosaikker, Jensen, som ikke tænker paa dit
Fødelands Dejlighed mer end som --«

»Naa, det var da lige rent Mel ud af Posen, men vi kan jo være lige
go'e Venner for det. Og Du _har_ nu lagt or'entlig i Kakelonen for
vos, Martin Frederiksen,« skæmter den tykke Guldsmed, der er bekendt
for at være en Fa'ens vittig Ra'.

»Ja varmt er det.«

»La' vos nu faa Øller paa Dækket, og kom Du saa hen og gør en bitte
Stads af Pe'ersen omme fra Torvet, for han er li'e ved at revne af
Misundelse over det, at Mads Baron sitter og blærer sig af sit ny
Butiksengventarium.«

-- I en munter Kreds henne ved den store Vandtønde begynder
Guldsmeden at fortælle:

»Ser I, det er sgu sandt, saa kommer der forleden saadan en temmelig
før Bondepige ind til mig, i Botekken, forstaar I. Du ska'te grine
endnu, Du -- Rosinpiller. Hva' skal De ha', Jomfru, siger jeg. Ja,
je' sku' da keve en Felovlsring til Jacob Hansen. Siger hun, forstaar
I. Naa, jeg faar jo saa en go' stor en frem. Ja, siger hun, jeg vil
jo saa gerne ha' stafferet en bitte Stads i den, siger hun. Ja, hvad
skal det saa være? Jeg har tænkt: hans Navn og mit Navn. Ja, siger
jeg saa -- for at høre mere, forstaar I, -- skal der saa staa mere?
Jo, jeg vilde saa urimelig gerne ha' hans Hjæ-ærte og mit Hjæ-ærte.«

Her lagde Jensen skælmskt Hovedet paa Siden og sang endnu mere paa
det, end han plejede. »Ja, siger jeg saa, er der saa ikke mere? siger
jeg, helt forgrint indvendig, kan I regne u'. Jo, hvis der er Plads,
sku' der gerne to Duer, der næbbes. Ja, er der saa ikke mere. Jo --
hans Hand og min Hand. Er der saa ikke mere? Nej.«

Den skraldende Latter, der lønnede Guldsmeden, gjorde ham helt
forhippet; han raabte højt for at overdøve de muntre Herrer.

»Jamen, jamen vær nu stille, kender I den om Bonden i det kongelige
Theater?«

»Det nunsæns har du fortaalt saa tidt!« kom det gnavent fra Skomager
Jespersen.

»Sikke no'et Slu'er. Op med den Jensen.«

»Ja, det er sgu sandt -- den er passeret« -- og saa fortæller Jensen
ivrigt, ligetil der kommer en Smule Luftning, og Ordren lyder til at
hejse Storsejlet for at hjælpe paa den lille Damper der forude ...

Folkene blive til deres store Morskab puffede væk fra Arbejdet af
Herrerne, der ere blevne overstadigt muntre af Øl og Søluft, og som
nu give sig til at hale under meget uens faldende ohi ohøj ... -- --

Kaptajnens Datter, Marie, har listet sig ned i Kahytten.

Hun retter ved Væggens Billeder, føler med Hænderne ind i Faderens
Køje, om Køjeklæderne ere stuvede ordentligt ned; hun løfter
Medicinkassens gule Laag og ser paa alle Smaaflaskerne. Oppe i Reolen
staar Lægebogen, som Kaptajnen raadfører sig med, naar de ude i rum
Sø eller ved de usunde Kystpladser inde paa Varmen faar Sygdom. Marie
tænker paa, at de siger, at hendes Fader har et eget Greb paa at
klare Folkene fra Sumpfeberen.

Hvem skal hjælpe ham, hvis han bliver syg? Styrmanden. Bare han er
sikker. -- Hans Holgersen! Hans Fader var Skolelærer; han er vist
mere klog paa den Slags; hans Ansigt ser da ud til det.

Bare Fader slet ikke blev syg.

Naada! Havde Fader ikke sagt, da de hjemme sagde rigtig Farvel:
»Ingen Flæben vil jeg se ombord for alle de Herrer og Damer.« Og saa
var Taarerne trillet helt ned i hans Skæg.

Desuden var det jo ikke første Gang, at hun tog Afsked. Det var hun
jo vant til fra lille af. -- Marie skubbede sig ind i Sofaen og satte
sig til Rette.

Der var egentlig noget dejligt i disse Afskedstimer. Saa blev al Kiv
og al Smaasludder glemt, og bagefter havde Moderen og hun at tænke
paa, hvor Fader, som var saa klog, og som forstod saadan at tage
Rhederne, og som kunde holde saa pæne Skaaltaler, hvor han havde sagt
mange kønne Ord ...

I Morges havde han løftet hende helt op fra Gulvet, bedt hende være
god mod Mutter og kaldt hende min Lysalf, min Yndling.

Saadanne Ord var der ingen anden, der brugte. Jo, for Resten ...
forleden Dag havde Hans Holgersen sagt: »Farvel du kære, unge
Jomfru«. Det lød saa smukt, han sagde det paa saadan en nydelig
Maade ...

Det var dog alligevel bedst at sige Farvel hjemme i deres egen Stue.
I London, hvor de undertiden besøgte Faderen og var ombord i nogle
Uger, der var det da meget værre at komme fra hinanden.

Og saa Rejsen hjem.

Turen over Nordsøen, den kunde gaa, men der var ækelt i den tredje
Klasses Jernbanekupé, hvor de havde saa travlt med at passe paa Kurve
og Tasker med Tørklæder, Konkylier og Dyr i Spiritus.

Maries Tanker var i det Øjeblik langt borte fra Gæsterne, Folkene og
hele den festlige Udfart.

Saa rystede hun det af sig, der var faret gennem hendes Hjærne
hernede i den lumre Kahyt og gik igen op i Solskinnet, der blinkede
i Søen, saa det formelig skar i Øjnene ...

Herrerne sled i det med Sejlet, og Marie lo højt ved det Syn. Se nu
til Fuldmægtigen, den Spirrevip, hvor han asede og stønnede og gik
paa, saa han saa arrig ud af bare Iver. Hvor han vilde blive elendig,
om han vidste, at naar han løftede Armene, saa man Skjorten mellem
Bukselinningen og Vesten. Sikken en Ulykke for ham, den Pyntekrukke!
...

Marie vilde sige Farvel til Folkene og gik forud, ... forbi
Konsulinden, -- som havde vendt sig fra Herrerne, der var blevne
hende noget ugenerte, -- forbi nogle Damer, der havde indrettet sig
om en Kaffekande og var venlige mod Kaptajnens Kone.

Maries Humeur forsvandt pludselig.

Saadan de dog i Grunden allesammen var! Akurat ligesom de gik hjemme
til Borgerforeningsbal. Nu skulde Folkenes Familie snart gaa fra
Borde for at komme ind med Lodsens Jolle; hist og her stod en og
anden med rødgrædte Øjne, -- men det lagde Gæsterne nok slet ikke
Mærke til. De kunde da ellers være sikre paa, at det var ikke saa let
at sige Farvel til en Sømand, der skulde være borte i Aarevis. --

Henne ved Falderebet stod Hans Holgersen; hans Øjenbryn havde
trukket sig smerteligt opad, hans Mund bævede. Det var slet ikke
kønt, men Marie syntes, hun havde aldrig før set, hvad for en pæn Gut
han var, -- og saa voksen og alvorlig. Han holdt sin Moder i Haanden,
han kyssede hende flere Gange ... hun sagde noget mellem hvert Kys;
Hans nikkede og græd.

Marie listede stille agter og fik ikke sagt Farvel. --

Solen skinnede paa Badehotellet inde i Land og paa de lysklædte
Skikkelser, der vinkede fra den lange Bro, der løb ud i Søen.

En Mand kom styrtende op paa den lille Høj til Flaget; han løste
Linen, firede Flaget ned og hejste det, firede ned og hejste ... de
derinde hilste det smukke Skib, der skulde ud paa de lange Farter.

Henne ved Rælingen begyndte man at raabe Hurra og svinge med Hattene.

Skomager Jespersens gnavne Bemærkning om, at Værten »ku' ha'
spanderet et Par Kanonslau« druknede i Jubelen, for Folkene faldt ind
med et langt, taktfast Hurra.

Maries Øjne lyste ... det var dog en stor og dejlig Dag; hun saa
beundrende efter sin Fader, der sprang hen til Flaget agter ved
Rattet for at gengælde Hilsenen.

Havde han for stærk Fart, eller tog han for haardt fat!

Den smekre Stang brast, Dannebrog segnede langsomt til Siden.

Det varede kun et Øjeblik for de omstaaende at surre Stangen sammen
og rejse den, men Marie havde som ved et Jag gennem Hjærtet faaet et
uudsletteligt Indtryk af dette Minuts pludselige Stilhed og af den
Ansigtstrækning, som Kaptajnen ikke havde kunnet beherske; naar man
saadan skal ud paa det uvisse, er man tilbøjelig til at tage Varsel
af den mindste Hændelse.

       *       *       *       *       *

Skonnertbriggen »Neptun« var i Aarevis paa de lange Rejser. Men ikke
altid slog det til, hvad der var spaaet i hin Dags mange Festtaler.

Kaptajn Frederiksen beholdt Navnet som den hurtigste Afrikafarer,
men Forhold, som han ikke var Herre over, og som gjorde, at man i de
Aaringer overalt søgte at skille sig af med sine Sejlskibsparter,
var Skyld i, at han stadigt maatte sende daarlige Efterretninger til
Rhederiet.

Heldigvis for ham skulde Skibet ikke Hjemmet nærmere end England; men
selv der følte han sig ikke fri, da hver Dag bragte gnavne Breve med
nærgaaende Spørgsmaal fra Rhederne.

Det var med et Lettelsens Suk, at han, naar han endelig havde
opdrevet et nogenlunde antageligt Tilbud, igen stod til Søs ...

Hans Fremtidsfantasier havde i Aarenes Løb undergaaet en langsom
Forandring, indtil han var naaet til at ønske sig et Embede i Ro
hjemme, i Fyrvæsenets Tjeneste, naar han endelig kunde trække sig
tilbage fra disse Kvaler og disse Kapløb om at faa fat i daarligt
betalte Fragter ...

Men for de to, der sidder derhjemme i det lille Hus med
de elfenbenshvide Gulve, de blanke Dørlaase og skinnende
Porcellainsvaser, staar han og »Neptun« endnu i hin Festdags Glans.

Naar Fatter engang lægger op, saa skal de jo leve af, hvad der
er tjent med »Neptun«; og Skuden, og hvad der kommer den ved, er
Samtaleemnet i de lange Vinteraftener, naar de efter Dagens Arbejde
sætte sig til Ro med Strikkestrømpen og Linnedsyningen.

Skønt det nu er to Aar siden, at de sidst var ombord, det var i
London, saa synes de dog, at de kender Skuden og dens skiftende
Mandskab rigtig godt, for Fatter er saa flink til at sende de
Amatørfotografier, som Agenterne paa Pladsen i Afrika tager.

Paa et af disse Billeder ser man under Solsejlet den høje, brede
Kaptajn i helt hvidt Tøj med broderede Morgensko paa Fødderne og
Kasketten skudt bag i Nakken. Omkring ham staa Folkene, Skibshunden,
hvis Tunge hænger den ud af Halsen, samt flere af de engelske
Herrer, som bo i Faktoriet. Det er slanke, smukke Mænd i flotte
Stanleydragter.

Og dog er det ikke paa dem, at Marie ser, naar hun -- hvad der kan
hænde, naar Moderen er ude -- tørrer sine Hænder og gaar fra sit
Formiddagsarbejde ind i Stuen, hvor der er saa pudset som ombord i en
Orlogsmand; hun tager Billedet i Kommodeskuffen og betragter det --
længe.

Nej, da ser hun paa en ung, barbenet Fyr med et lille Overskæg, som
er spiret frem, siden hun sidst var sammen med ham i London.

Alle de gode Minder der da komme op i hende! ... Saa morsomt og
hyggeligt de havde det sammen i de Dage, da Losningen var forbi,
og Indladningen endnu ikke var begyndt; de havde været sammen i
Vokskabinetter, i Theatret og inde i de store Kirker.

Hans var dog saadan noget helt andet end disse Urtekræmmersvende og
Handelskontorister, som satte alle deres Penge paa Klæder og var saa
vigtige og saa snakkesalige og dog ikke kendte noget til Verden uden
for denne lille By.

Se Hans, han har nu sparet op af sin Hyre og ligger i Kjøbenhavn og
læser til Styrmandseksamen. Det ved hun af Faderens Breve, i hvilke
han altid er rosende omtalt, om end Kaptajnen undertiden har hentydet
til manglende Sans for højere Interesser.

»Skidt med det«, farer det pludselig halvhøjt ud af Marie. Hun
mindes, hvor dejligt, hun syntes, det var, at Hans ikke talte og
forklarede, ligesom Faderen plejede, da de vare inde i den store
Kirke sammen, men bare gik stille ved Siden af hende og holdt hende
i Haanden, ligesaa højtidelig til Mode, som hun selv var ...

Han kunde dog for Resten gerne gøre en lille Afstikker over til dem,
inden han igjen rejste fra Landet ... ud i Verden, til store Byer
med megen Lystighed og til usunde Pladser i Syd-Amerika og Afrika.

       *       *       *       *       *

Og Hans kom en Søndag Morgen for at faa Hilsen med til Kaptajnen. Det
træffer sig nemlig saa heldigt, at han igen kan komme til at fare med
sin gamle Kaptajn.

Og den Dag var det med en egen husmoderlig, omhyggelig Følelse, at
Marie lavede Sødsuppen til og stegte Rødspætterne ... det var saa
morsomt at vide, at hun og Moderen ikke skulde sidde alene og spise
den gode Søndagsmad ...

Hans sukkede undertiden, som om han var bedrøvet over noget, og bedre
og finere Eksamen, end han mødte med, kunde der da ikke forlanges!
Saa var han saa tavs. Naa, han havde jo aldrig havt det meget med at
bralre op om al mulig Snak, tænkte Marie.

Hen paa Eftermiddagen sad de i Stuen alle tre. Hans, der havde slaaet
sig til Ro paa Puffen mellem Vinduerne, saa hele Tiden efter Marie,
der sad i Halvmørket inde i Stuen; men saa snart hun saa paa ham,
trak han Øjnene til sig. Derfor gav Marie sig til at kige ud paa
Gaden, for -- kunde det glæde ham at se paa hende -- saa maatte han
saamænd saa inderlig gerne.

Naar hun rakte efter noget, eller naar hun rejste sig og gik over
Gulvet, gjorde hun det uvilkaarligt langsommere og kønnere, end hun
plejede, naar hun til daglig havde travlt. Hun tænkte ikke videre
over det, -- men hun nænnede ikke andet for hans Skyld.

Frøknerne fra Byfogdens og Candidaten paa Kontoret spadserede forbi
og nikkede ind; og da Lampen derovre paa Lygtepælen var bleven
tændt og spejlede sig i Vandpytterne, gik Skomagerens Døtre til
Sangforeningsbal med opheftede Kjoler og hæklede Tørklæder over de
krøllede Frisurer.

Ovre i Genboens Villa sad Frøkenen ved Klaveret, og hendes Kæreste
stod ved Siden og spillede Violin. Skæret fra et Par smaa Lamper drev
mellem Palmer og Blomster i Karnappen ud paa den sølede Vej.

Der er kønt derovre, tænkte Marie, men her er ligesaa rart, naar her
saadan er en, som mener os det godt og er glad ved at være hos os,
som Hans er.

Men nu var der ikke længe til, han skulde af Sted; Moderen var i
Køkkenet for at lave en Kop Afskedskaffe. -- Det varede nok længe,
inden han igen kom til at sidde i en hyggelig Stue.

Marie fik pludselig en inderlig Lyst til at gaa hen og sætte sig ved
Siden af ham -- sidde ganske stille hos ham og holde ham i Haanden,
medens Tiden gik.

Saa var det jo, som de var for Alvor Kærester. Snak. -- Han vilde vel
ikke, han sagde jo ingen Ting. Men kunde det glæde ham, naar han laa
derude paa Søen og døjede ondt, at hun var hans Kæreste, saa bandt
hun sig gerne til ham, for hvad Hans vilde, det vilde hun ogsaa.

Men de kunde vel ogsaa godt være Venner, uden at der straks skulde
tænkes paa Forlovelse. Hun var vel ikke af dem, der absolut skulde
have en Kæreste. Det jagede jo ikke. -- --

Hans rejste sig. Han sagde Farvel et Par Gange til Marie. Da han
havde faaet Frakken knappet og var halvt ude af Døren, vendte han sig
til Madam Frederiksen og sagde:

»Ja, Kaptajnen har engang sagt noget til mig om, at han har lagt ud
for dem, at ... ja, at Mandfolk tidt er noget Rak, og ... at fine
Herrer ikke altid saadan er saa rigtig fine, naar det kommer til
Stykket ... og Marie er jo ... hun er jo kønnere end Folk er flest«.
-- Han hakkede i det, men sagde pludselig bestemt:

»Hun skal vel ikke tage Plads og rejse fra Madammen?«

»Jeg bliver hos Mor, saa længe Far er paa Søen!« siger Marie. »Skønt
jeg rigtignok helst vilde til et stort Hus og lære noget og se anden
Folkeskik«, føjer hun til.

»Til næste Aar skal vi besøge Fatter i London«, trøster Moderen og
giver Hans Pakken med Uldtøj og Strømper, som han skal have med til
Kaptajnen.

»Ja, og saa skal vi maaske med en Rejse. -- Mor skal skrives ind som
Kok!« udbryder Marie, pludselig leende.

Hans bliver højrød, siger igen Farvel, og denne Gang kommer han da
endelig af Sted.

-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --

Skonnertbriggen »Neptun« gaar igen fra England -- denne Gang med
Fragt til Brasilien ...

Kaptajn Frederiksen sidder efter endt Vagt i Kahytten. Han faar Piben
tændt, laver sig en Grog og slutter et Brev til den korresponderende
Rheder.

Dernæst begynder han at skrive til sin Kone og Datter.

Efter at have fortalt om Navigeringen i en Storm, som de nylig red
af, anbefaler han dem at takke »det store Ubekendte« for, at han
ogsaa denne Gang var lykkelig nok til at klare »Neptun« fra truende
Fare.

Han læser denne Sætning igennem engang til, for han véd godt, at hans
Kone ikke kan lide, at han ikke skriver »Vorherre i Himlen«.

Naa, det var ikke saadan at forklare sig for Kvinder, og paa dette
Punkt vilde han nu være sand og oprigtig.

Der var saamænd nok, han maatte skjule og lave om paa.

Nu har han imidlertid tabt Lysten til at skrive videre og lukker
Mappen for i Dag ...

Brevet ligger en Tid i hans Pult, til han tager det frem og igen
begynder at skrive.

                                Sydatlanterhavet den 12 Juli 1888.

    Min kære Kone og Datter.

 Som I seer af Overskriften ligger vi i Atlanterhavet endnu.
 Det er i Dag blikstille, Neptun ligger stille og avangserer
 ikke, snarere gaar det lidt tilbage endsom frem -- kedeligt
 -- ubehageligt, saa jeg jo ikke er i det bedste Humør. Saa var
 Stormene bedre skønt vi havde den ene værre endsom den anden,
 ret som om det var onde Furier som var sluppet løs imod mig og
 Neptun. Men blæse være med de Storme paa Havet, skønt det har
 gjort mig lidt ondt for Skuden, der har øvet sig i akrobatiske
 Kunster, snart stod hun paa Næsen og snart paa Spejlet, men de
 Storme har jeg været vant til at bekæmpe fra min Ungdom af, jeg
 regner dem for Legeværk mod dem, jeg har i Havn. Men nu ikke
 mere om det. En Nyhed har jeg at fortælle Eder. En mærkelig
 Adspredelse har jeg havt i Dag, og som jeg skal fortælle Eder
 om. Da jeg kom paa Dækket kredsede et halvt hundrede Alen fra os
 nogle Fugle, som lignede Maager, kuns var de saa meget større, 7
 Alen mellem Vingespidserne. Folkene havde i flere Timer skiftet
 til at have Udkigstørn efter dem, Fuglene holdt sig vedvarende
 til Luvart, og Gutternes Tænder løb mere og mere i Vand efter
 fersk Kød. Saa tog jeg mit Jagtgevær, gik i Jollen med Hans, han
 er paalidelig, den eneste Danske jeg har Ombord. De andre Fyre
 kunde maaske hitte paa Gavtyvestreger naar man var alene med dem
 i Jollen paa Verdenshavet. Man har jo ikke kunnet opdrage dem
 som Kæledægger. Det var forunderligt kan I tro. Et Stykke fra
 flød mit stolte Skib. Hans roede med smaa Tag for ikke at skræmme
 de kredsende Fugle; jeg tror ikke, han havde nogen Følelse af
 Øjeblikkets Storhed. Jeg skød 3. Det er min Mening, at Vingerne
 skal sendes til zoologisk Have.

 Folkene holde stort Festmaaltid.

 Jeg sidder alene i min Kahyt og skriver til Eder I to kære
 derhjemme i det lille dyrebare Danmark og tænker paa, hvor
 forunderligt det var -- i den skrøbelige Jolle paa det store
 Verdenshav -- for et Øjeblik ligesom sat helt udenfor det hele,
 alene med den Følelse -- -- -- --

Det var de sidste Ord, som Kaptajn Martin Frederiksen skrev til sin
Kone og Datter.

Et Telegram fra Rio meldte hans pludselige Død.

       *       *       *       *       *

Madam Frederiksen og Marie flyttede ind i Landet til en større By og
begyndte et Stryge- og Vaskeri.

Det kneb, særlig for Marie, at undvære »Stranden«.

Naar de Længsler kom op i hende, gik hun -- hvis der intet
presserende Arbejde var -- en Tur ned til Byens Havn, der ved en
Kanal stod i Forbindelse med Fjord og Hav.

Skibene og det muntre, travle Liv var der. Men den Rendesten var
dog ikke i Stand til at mætte Længslen efter den friske Søvind
og den videre Udsigt. Hun rystede saa irriteret Forknytheden af
sig, -- ingen Flæben, ingen Nykker; man skulde holde ud og ikke
give sig! Hun og Moderen kunde bedst klare sig med Enkekassens og
Skipperforeningens Tilskud her, -- altsaa blev de her!

Saadan raisonnerede Marie, vendte, gik forbi den lille, graa
Toldbygning og hjem; tog fat paa at hjælpe Moderen med Strygning
eller gav sig til at udfærdige Regninger til Kunderne.

-- Naar Dagens Arbejde var endt, gik Madam Frederiksen træt i Seng.
Marie blev gerne siddende lidt og døsede over Avisen.

Hvor det var trist altsammen.

Hvad brød hun sig om Ensomheden, da Faderen levede. Dengang havde
de saa meget at snakke om, saa mange Breve at tage frem, og Avisen
ventedes med spændt Interesse, -- der kunde jo være en eller anden
Efterretning, som kunde have noget at sige for »Neptuns« Kaptajn; og
alt, hvad de oplevede i deres daglige Liv, fik en særegen Betydning,
fordi der skulde skrives om det til Faderen. Dengang vidste de, at
naar Faderen kom hjem, eller de rejste for at møde ham, blev alt helt
anderledes.

Nu var der ikke andet at gøre end at hænge i fra Morgen til Aften.
Der var ingen afvekslende Hvile i Udsigt. Bedring i Kaarene var der
ikke Tale om; de maatte nok være glade til, saalænge det gik, som det
gik.

Marie havde havt Planer om at tage Plads; saa kunde Moderen fæste en
Jomfru til Hjælp, om det skulde behøves.

Men den Aften, hun begyndte at tale om det, gav Moderen sig til at
græde, ligesom naar de fordybede sig i Minderne, og hun lovede Marie,
at hun vilde besørge alt Sliddet, naar blot Marie vilde blive hos
hende og klare det med Regnskabet og Aftaler med Kunderne.

Marie gav intet bestemt Svar; hun syntes, det var hendes Pligt at
gøre sig haard og udføre den Plan, hun havde lagt. --

Da hun vaagnede næste Morgen, hørte hun, at Moderen arbejdede
forsigtigt ude i Køkkenet for ikke at vække hende. Marie saa paa
Uhret; det var en Time tidligere, end de ellers plejede at begynde
Dagens Arbejde.

Marie rejste sig for at staa op! Moderen kom ind med varm Kaffe og
sad paa Sengekanten hos hende, medens hun drak.

Marie forstod godt disse tavse Ømhedserklæringer; de gjorde hende
blød om Hjærtet, og af sig selv lovede hun at slaa Tankerne om at
tage Plads ud af Hovedet.

Hendes Moder behøvede hende dog. Det var der jo ellers ingen, der
gjorde.

Hans kunde jo saa udmærket undvære hende, selv om han havde skrevet
rigtig smukt efter Faderens Død, og selv om han havde forhørt sig
meget omstændeligt om deres Kaar.

Han laa mest derinde paa Varmen og sejlede; hjem kom han ikke --
Fritid undte han sig ikke, og nu siden hans Moders Død havde det vel
ikke saa meget at sige med en Maaneds Hyre og en Afmønstring; men
nej, saa snart han naaede England -- saa ud igen. Han kunde have
taget hende dengang, om han havde brudt sig om hende; det gjorde han
altsaa ikke, -- Sømænd var ikke saadan at stole paa, de saa' saa
mange og havde Tankerne saa mange Steder.

Naa, Kærestesorg for hans Skyld, det var der nu ikke Tale om; hun
kendte ham jo saa lidt, saa der var ikke noget for hende at sørge
over. -- En af Vaskeriets regelmæssigste Kunder var en Kommis
Lauritzen, der brugte meget Manchetlinned, og som altid selv kom og
betalte sin Regning.

Han gjorde stormende Kur til Marie og bød hende med i Theatret anden
Gang, han talte med hende.

Marie vilde ikke.

Hans Moder boede paa første Sal i Baghuset og havde Skole. Siden han
havde »opdaget« Marie, kom han hjem hver Aften paa en kort Visit og
kigede da altid ind til Frederiksens med det samme.

Madam Frederiksen, der var gæstfri, inviterede hans Moder over til
Aftenkaffe, men fik Afslag.

Lauritzen friede til Marie otte Dage efter, at han første Gang havde
set hende.

Marie blev ulykkelig, og Lauritzen ærgrede sig over sin ubehændige
Taktik og begreb ikke, at han, der kendte Kvindehjærtet og saa
udmærket havde Taget paa at appellere til dets yndige Svagheder, ikke
havde forstaaet, at her skulde han have holdt sig afventende en Tid
endnu.

Og Hr. Lauritzen beroligede Marie, erklærede, at det var hendes store
Dejlighed, der havde faaet ham til at overile sig til et Skridt, hvis
Vigtighed han fuldt vel anerkendte; men han var hendes oprigtigste
Ven og skulde aldrig, aldrig bede hende om mere end Venskab, før det
Momang kom, at hendes Hjærte flammede for ham.

Dette var Marie meget bekvemt; for vel kunde hun egentlig, naar hun
rigtig tænkte sig om, ikke lide Lauritzen, men han var dog altid lidt
Afveksling og paa en Maade ikke saa paatrængende som de andre Herrer,
der paa Gaden og i Vaskeriet søgte at gøre hendes Bekendtskab.

Nogen maatte hun da for Resten ogsaa have at tale med.

Lauritzen bad hende halvt spøgende om, at hun -- som Tegn paa, at hun
tillod ham venskabelige, broderlige Følelser, -- vilde gaa med ham i
Theatret næste Søndag. Hendes Moder skulde ogsaa med, tilføjede han,
da hun ikke straks svarede.

Igen Theatret! Det var saa fristende, for Marie elskede at gaa paa
Komedie, især naar de spillede rørende Stykker.

Hun svarede ikke helt afgjort nej, og Lauritzen erklærede, at næste
Søndag sendte han hende og Moderen Billetter, selv vilde han tillade
sig at sidde ved Siden af dem.

Søndag Formiddag var han inde for at aflevere Billetterne; han
snakkede vidt og bredt en Timestid om et Par formodede Skandaler og
om sig selv og sine Udsigter paa den forestaaende Session.

Hen paa Eftermiddagen kom en Hotelkarl med et Brev til Madam
Frederiksen. Hun fik Brillerne fat, og læste:

 »I Continuation af mit tiligere og af Dags Dato har jeg
 forglemt at erindre den tiligere Begyndelse af den paa Theatret
 stedfindende Forestilling, som undtagelsesvis er Kl. 7. Min
 ærbødigste Hilsen til Deres Frøken Datter. Deres med megen
 Agtelse F. L. M. Lauritzen.«

Madammen blev yderligere imponeret af ham. For Resten havde hun været
det straks, og hun skjulte det ikke, naar de talte om ham, der saadan
havde boret sig ind i deres daglige Færden og dermed i deres daglige
Tanker. -- --

Da det første rørende Stykke, hvor Marie kun havde Øje og Øre for
Scenen, var forbi, morede hun sig ikke rigtig. Der var saa meget
halvsjofelt i det andet Stykke, saa meget af det grimme fra Gaden;
-- desuden: hendes Kavallers Latter fulgte lige efter de vovede
Hentydninger, og det gjorde hende usikker og satte hende i daarligt
Humør.

Efter Forestillingen vilde hun helst have været hjem, men Lauritzen
vilde absolut have dem hen paa et Hotel for at drikke Kaffe, og Marie
maatte føje ham og Moderen.

Men hun var ikke vel til Mode. Hun saa godt, at et Par ældre, pæne
Kommisser, som Lauritzen paatrængende og flot hilste paa, knap
gad hilse igen. Og det generede hende meget, at han kommanderede
med Tjenerne, kasserede Kagerne og forlangte andre og henledte
Opmærksomheden paa sig ved støjende og familiært at hilse til højre
og venstre.

Da han gik hen til Buffetten, spærrede en Kammerat Vejen for ham ved
at strække et Ben ud; Lauritzen besvarede denne indirekte Spørgen:

»Gelinde, gelinde, jeg er diskræ!«

»Fanden tro Dig, din Bondedreng!«

De to Herrer lo raat. -- --

-- Marie laa længe vaagen den Nat.

Hun tænkte paa det første Stykke.

Aah ja ja. Hvis der blot i Virkeligheden var saadan en rar, dannet
Mand, som hun kunde gaa til, i hvis pæne Stue hun kunde sidde
hyggeligt og blive net behandlet, saa kunde hun fortælle ham, hvordan
det altsammen var og bede ham hjælpe med et godt Raad.

Naa, hvis der virkelig var saadan en, hvad vilde hun saa sige; hvad
bildte hun sig egentlig ind, der var i Vejen?

Marie smaagræd.

De havde det jo helt godt, og der var ikke noget bestemt, som var
kedeligt og trist, men Stuen var saa lille og beklumret, Gaden var
saa grim, alle Mennesker jagede af Sted og var utilfredse saa med
deres Stilling saa med hinanden. Og den evige Vasken og Strygen --
blot for at skaffe Mad i Munden og Tag over Hovedet, det var saa
ensformigt.

Hun var ikke doven; det var ikke det; men hun var da ung endnu og
længtes efter lidt udover det sædvanlige -- noget som Londonnerturene
eller Faderens Hjemkomst; -- bare ikke dette: op om Morgenen, Slid,
Mad, Slid, i Seng og saa det samme næste Dag igen.

Var det Fornøjelser hun trængte til? -- Saa kunde hun jo blot tage
mod Lauritzens Invitationer til Theater og Baller; -- -- naa ja, saa
kunde hun jo tage ud med ham; hun var jo da for Resten Kaptajnsdatter
og vidste nok, hvordan hun skulde gerere sig, saa at han ingen
Friheder tog sig. At han saa væmmelig ud tidt, naar han gloede
paa hende, det var Sludder af hende at tænke paa; Mandfolk var jo
nu Mandfolk. -- -- Men det var ikke væmmeligt, da Hans den sidste
Eftermiddag sad og saa paa hende.

Marie kunde ikke rede det ud fra hinanden, og hun følte sig angst og
hjælpeløs, som noget truede hende.

Madam Frederiksen snorkede.

Et Øjeblik var dette Legeme, der laa her i Sengen hos hende, Marie
imod. Naa, nu var hun da ved at blive baade ækel og skruptosset.

Det var nok Tid at tage Reb i Sejlene, ellers gik da al sund Fornuft
rabundus.

Og Marie tvang sig til at gennemgaa det første Stykke, Scene for
Scene; ingen Springen over, ingen Svinkeærinder, ingen unødvendig
Flæben over sig selv og Laven Grevindenykker; -- -- hun sov, før hun
naaede til Frierscenen. -- -- --

Naar Lauritzen ikke kom, spurgte Madammen efter ham.

»Du skulde ikke støde ham for Hovedet, Marie, Du fortryder det, naar
jeg er død, og Du sidder alene med Redeligheden.«

»Der er da andre til end ham.«

»Jamen Du vil jo ikke gøre noget for at faa Bekendtere.«

-- Madammen tilskyndede kun lempeligt, hun trængte ikke ind paa
Datteren, men Marie vidste saa inderlig vel, at naar hun gennem
Dampen fra Vaskekedlen saa Moderens Ansigt blive tankefuldt, da var
det Lauritzens fremtidige Boutik -- Duge og Lagen, Stole og Borde,
Køkkensager og Gardiner, der spillede glædeligt op i hendes Stump
Fantasi, medens Hænderne skrubbede op og ned ad Vaskebrædtet.

Ogsaa for Marie var der -- ved denne Indretten Hjem i Tankerne --
noget lokkende, som satte hendes Drømmeevne i en behagelig Svingning
og bar langt bort fra Vaskehusets klamme Dampe og vaade Stengulv. --

Det var heldigt for Lauritzen, at hun fik et Brev fra ham lige efter
saadan et stjaalent Strejftog i Fantasiens Rige.

Hun satte sig ind i Stuen og læste:

    Elskede Missemor.

 Situasionen er nu af den Beskaffenhed, at jeg i Henhold til mit
 tidligere udtalte og Hjærtes Kærlighed.

 Jeg kan sige, vær ej traurig i Sind og Skind, men lyt til mit Ord
 lad Lykken komme ind, hvis Du vil være min maa Du ikke gaa og
 spelle fin. Bliv min Kone, saa skal jeg sætte Dig paa en Throne.
 Ja nu frier jeg til Dig min elskede Pige. Jeg vil gerne have
 Dig saa snart som muligt, ved Din side kan jeg lægge mit flotte
 Ungkarleliv af. Og hør nu, har jeg digtet et Vers til Dig.

    Du har et Ansigt meget fint
    Du speller i Vaskeriet første Fiolin
    ligesom Stjerner er dine Øjne klare
    du er en første Klasses Vare.

    Hvor højt jeg end fløj Du naaede mig dog
    dine Øjne mig ej bedrog
    Du har rigtig kunnet mig forhekse
    vær ej mer af de strekse.

 Dette er skreven til din Ære min dyrebare Pige. Jeg maa medele
 Dig, at det har alletider været min Mening, at jeg vilde have en
 rigtig sød og flot Kone og kan jeg ingen bedre faa end Dig selv
 om Du ikke er øverst paa Rangstigen, hvad man jo ikke kan sige,
 er det min overbevisning. Om to Timer henter jeg dit Svar, naar
 vi har lukket, og skal Du da sidde paa mit Skød og skal det være
 mig en Fornøjelse at trykke det første Elskovskys paa din Mund.
 Var jeg ikke saa vis paa, at Du maatte elske mig, var jeg ikke
 saadan i kulør, som jeg er nu, jeg tænker paa, at Du nu skal
 blive min Kæreste rigtig med Ring. Nu glæder jeg mig til at se
 Dig alene og ser jeg helst, at Du sender din Moder i Byen at vi
 rigtig kan sitte i Sofaen alene som andre Kærestefolk. Og tegner
 jeg idet jeg er din, til Døden skilder os ad igen

                                               F. L. M. Lauritzen.

Uf, hvor kunde det Menneske dog ogsaa skabe sig og vrøvle. Marie
lagde Brevet sammen og glattede Folderne haardt. Hun skulde dog ikke
have noget af at være alene med _ham_.

Hun rejste sig for at kalde paa Moderen. -- Aah, hvor var her dog
grimt i Aften.

Paa Kommoden stod en Lampe uden Kuppel og oste lidt; der var koldt,
Gardiner var ikke rullet ned, og en vildfremmed Herre, der gik forbi,
nikkede ugenert ind til hende. Paa Sofa og Stole flød Dynger af
Fremmedes smudsige Tøj, som Marie skulde tælle. Døren ud til Gangen
var ikke rigtig lukket, og Støjen af et Skænderi lød helt ind til den
unge Pige.

Hun satte sig træt i Sofaen og lagde Hovedet ned paa sine Arme. Hvor
alt dette dog var forskelligt fra »Neptuns« Udfart, da Sommervinden
løftede Flag og Vimpler, og Festtalerne berømmede hendes Fader ...
Det var forbi for længe, længe siden ... men hvor havde hun tænkt og
tænkt paa den Dag og troet, at der vilde komme Dage, der var festlige
som den.

Men det var der altsaa ikke kommet. Hvorledes skulde det ogsaa gaa
til?

Marie løftede Hovedet og saa ud i Stuen.

Hun var vel gal, om hun kimsede ad Lauritzen; hun kom vel nok til at
holde af ham, hun havde jo ikke holdt af nogen anden -- det med Hans
var jo alligevel ikke andet end Indbildning.

Naar hun ikke var lykkelig ved at blive ved at gaa her i Sliddet uden
at opleve noget særlig kønt, saa maatte hun vel tage Lauritzen og
sige Tak til.

Og Moderen vilde blive glad ved det, og hun kunde saamænd nok trænge
til en rigtig Hjærtensglæde engang igen.

Hurtigt -- for ikke at vige tilbage fra dette, der vilde give
Forandring og forskaane for Moderens svage Tilskyndelser og hans
paatrængende Plagerier, gik hun ud i Køkkenet.

»Lauritzen vil forloves med mig, Mor.«

»Jahne dog! Hvad er det Du siger!«

Madammen saa ængstelig paa hende. »Du tager ham vel, Marie?«

»Det gør jeg vel Mor, -- -- saa kan jeg maaske gøre det lidt bedre
for Dig, saadan Du altid slider.«

»Herregu' lille Marie, det er jo nu det, som passer for mig. Men Du
skulde jo da have det lidt finere. Og saa kan jeg da rolig lukke
mine Øjne, naar Du er forsørget. -- Hvis nu Fatter havde levet,
Herregu'.«

Men der blev ikke Tid til Rørelse. Tøjet skulde ryddes til Side,
Stuen opvarmes, og andre Forberedelser gøres. --

Lauritzen stillede Klokken ni med en Azalia i silkepapirspyntet
Potte, den holdt sig bedre end en Buket, som jo egentlig hørte til
ved en saadan Lejlighed.

Moderen blev lidt ude i Køkkenet, og Lauritzen begyndte uforstyrret
et langt mundtligt Frieri. Marie tabte hurtig Traaden, for hun havde
grebet den Sætning, at det ligefrem var hendes _Pligt_ at forlove sig
med ham, da hun havde Magt til at frelse ham fra daarligt Levned.
Det forekom hende saa uendelig latterligt, at det skulde tages saa
alvorligt med saadan en forbumlet, rødøjet Handelsbetjent; -- hun
havde den Pligt at gifte sig med ham, for at han skulde holde op
at svire, sagde han; det var jo ogsaa nemmere end at gøre sig den
Ulejlighed selv at sige stop! Hvor var det i Grunden grinagtigt --
skønt det gjaldt hele hendes Fremtid; -- hun smilede, Smilet blev
til Latter; med Vilje blev hun ved at le, -- det nyttede jo ikke at
græde, man skulde jo gaa paa Jorden, selv om den var gloende, og
_hun_ var vel ikke mere højfornem og sippet end andre Piger.

For Resten fik hun sig vel nok en meget rar Mand, han saa jo da til
sin Moder hver Aften.

Madammen kom ind. Lauritzen, der just ikke fandt Maries Latter
afvisende, selv om den forekom ham mindre romantisk i et saadan
Øjeblik, begyndte at kysse Marie med en Ugenerthed, som om de havde
været forlovet i Aarevis.

Hun stødte ham vredt fra sig.

»Ja, Lauritzen, hun har jo ikke været forlovet før,« jævnede Madammen.

»Er med paa Noderne, Svigermama! En sart _Kvinde_. _Gelinde_.
Forstaar!« -- Lauritzen udviklede sin Menneskekundskab ved Hjælp af
alle de Føljetoner, han kunde faa fat i.

Aftenen sneg sig langsomt hen for Marie.

Lauritzen var overbærende med hendes Koldsindighed, som han egentlig
fandt ganske fornem, og han prædikede med al sin Tungefærdighed
og Selvsikkerhed om det tilkommende Hjem og sin egen fremtidige
Stilling. --

Da han skulde til at gaa, og Marie pligtopfyldende, men koldt, tog
mod hans Kys, sagde han ærgelig:

»Du skal værsgo' at tage Dig i Situationen, Marie, og være min
Kæreste rigtig.«

Marie følte det som en Lettelse, da hun drejede Nøglen om i Døren
efter ham.

Naa, hun vænnede sig vel til det Slikkeri. Nu var hun jo bunden til
ham, og han blev vel nok god imod hende, naar han syntes, hun var saa
dejlig, som han sagde.

Men Højtid og Glæde, det var der ikke over hende, som hun gik der
og ryddede til Side og af og til talte ind til Moderen, som træt
skyndte sig i Seng.

Marie skyndte sig ogsaa og lagde sig snart i Dobbeltsengen ved Siden
af Moderen.

De laa lidt stille i Mørket.

Derpaa sagde Moderen:

»Herregu' lille Marie, saa skal vi skilles.«

»Han skal da have Forretning først.«

»Det bliver da før eller senere. Saa bliver her stille.«

»Du skal bo i Nærheden af os Moder; saa kan vi gaa sammen, og Du
bliver ikke helt alene.«

»Om Natten bliver jeg da. Du kan ellers tro, jeg har tidt havt Plasér
af at ligge og lytte til, hvor Du dog kunde trække Vejret dybt, naar
Du sov.«

Det, som hele Aftenen stille havde gnavet i Maries Sind, fik nu Magt,
og hun brast i Graad.

»Saa saa lille Marie. Saa saa. Græd dog ikke saadan; det javer helt
igennem mig at høre det. Du kan jo gøre det om, hvis det skal være.
Du skal jo da ikke giftes lige med det samme. Og han siger, at han
skal være saa mageløs mod Dig. Du skal bare ikke spekulere. Put Du
Dig nu godt ned og læs din Aftenbøn, saa linder det.« -- --

Næste Formiddag laa der et Brev til Marie i det aabne Køkkenvindue.
-- Marie læste det; det var Skolebestyrerinden i Baghuset, Lauritzens
Moder, der henvendte sig til Frederiksens med Bøn om et Laan paa 15
Kr. til Hjælp til Husleje; hun havde betænkt sig længe, men vidste
ikke andet Raad, og nu da hun af Rullekonen havde hørt, at Ferdinand
havde kysset Marie ude i Gangen, og de sagtens var forlovede, mente
hun, at hun i sin Nød turde henvende sig til dem. Det var jo kun et
Laan. --

Hvad var nu dette?

Uden at sige noget til Moderen tog Marie sin Sparekassebog og gik hen
og hævede Pengene.

Om Eftermiddagen gik hun over til Baghuset.

Ad en smudsig, stejl Trappe kom hun til en Dør, hvor der hængte en
Tavle med Svamp og Griffel lige under Navnepladen. --

                          DOROTHEA LAURITZEN
                          Skolebestyrerinde

læste Marie og bankede flere Gange paa. Da ingen svarede, gik hun ind
i Stuen.

Der syntes at være gjort ihærdige Forsøg paa at dække, at alt var
i Forfald. Gulvbrædderne var slidte og graa; et af dem vippede, da
Marie traadte paa det, og der laa mange smaa og uens Tæppelapper.
Stoppede Gardiner hang for de lave Vinduer, hvor den blaahvide Maling
paa mange Steder var skallet af Træet. Om Bordet stod forskellige
Slags Stole. Hæklede hvide Stykker dækkede over det ituslidte
Betræk. Langs den ene Væg hældede under en Del blegnede Fotografier
et taffelformet Klaver; Pedalen var brudt af, og Laaget havde en
Revne. Paa en Konsol stod mange Billeder af Hr. F. L. M. Lauritzen i
forskellige Stillinger. Det dunkle Spejl over dem gengav udvisket et
Hjørne af det triste Interiør.

Marie stod lidt.

Saa kom Fru Lauritzen ind. Hun var graa og mager; over Øjnene
hvælvede Pandebenet sig kantet og skarpt, Munden faldt ind om nogle
grimme Tandstumper. Hendes Væsen var nervøst og uroligt.

Marie sagde:

»Det var om Brevet.«

Skolebestyrerinden tav afventende. Marie fortsatte:

»Moder kunde jo komme til at trænge, hvis vi blev syge eller saadan.
Jeg mener, De kan jo blot sige det til Deres Søn.«

»Min Søn! -- Det er ikke saa let at bede sine egne, skal jeg sige
Dem, Frøken. Desuden, han har frabedt sig, at jeg beder ham om mere
end de 5 Kroner, han giver mig hver Termin. Og han kunde jo blive
vred og tage dem fra mig ogsaa. Det er jo kun et Laan, De kan være
saa sikker paa, at De faar dem igen. Alle Børnene har endnu ikke
betalt Brændepengene.«

»Ja, værsgo, her er Pengene.«,

Skolebestyrerindens Haand, der nervøst havde glattet frem og tilbage
paa Bordkanten, blev stille.

»Tak. Men De skal nok faa dem igen. Det kan De være vis paa.«

Hendes Ydre gik Marie til Hjærte; hun vilde gerne vise lidt
Venlighed, men den anden stod og tav saa tillukket; Marie brød Pavsen
ved at spørge:

»Hvor har De Skolestuerne?«

»Den er her; saa har jeg nogle Bænke om Bordet; jeg rydder dem ud til
om Eftermiddagen, for jeg vil jo gerne have det lidt pænt.«

»Hvor mange Elever har De?«

»Ja, nu er et Par bleven konfirmerede. Jeg havde ellers atten.«

»Hvor meget faar De saa i Skolepenge?«

»Ja, -- det er forskelligt; de større giver da som oftest 1 Krone 75.«

»Om Maaneden?«

»Ja; det er jo ikke meget, -- men naar jeg endda blot fik nye
ind. Men det er ikke saadan. Jeg kan jo da nok naa at sy lidt for
Forretninger om Eftermiddagen. Men« -- det kom næsten ufrivilligt --
»sommetider har jeg alligevel knap Brød i Huset!«

»Men sig det dog til Deres Søn. Vi maa tale med ham om det!«

»Det maa De ikke! Og De vil endelig nok være saa god ikke at sige om
Laanet. Han bliver saa vred og kunde let tage de 5 Kroner fra mig ved
Terminen. Men hvad skulde jeg gøre?«

»De kan tro, naar han rigtig ved, hvordan det er, vil han nok ordne
det noget bedre for Dem. Han faar jo god Løn og --«

»Han bruger ogsaa meget til sine fine Klæder! Ja, han maa jo nu ogsaa
være pænt klædt i Forretningen, det maa han jo. Og engang maa det
vel blive til noget, at han gør Alvor af at faa lidt lært; ellers
kommer de jo ingen Vegne rigtig nu til Dags. Men _jeg_ kan ikke give
mere til ham, jeg har saamænd gjort, hvad jeg kunde, da han lærte og
saadan. -- Men saa mange Tak for Laanet; De skal faa dem igen, men De
maa endelig ikke sige noget til Ferdinand og heller ikke, at jeg véd,
De er forlovede, for han bliver saa vred, naar jeg blander mig i hans
-- som med den forrige Forlovede. Han fortæller mig det nok.« --

Med tungt Hjærte gik Marie ned ad Trappen.

Hvad vilde Hans, som havde været saa god ved sin Moder, sige, hvis
han vidste, _hun_ havde saadan en Kæreste.

I en dump, trist Stemning kom hun ind og gav sig straks til at
arbejde med Regnskabet; alt det, som havde paavirket hende til at
tage Lauritzen, laa som Taager over hendes Beslutsomhed.

En Buket, som Lauritzen sendte, lod hun ligge uden at sætte den i
Vand.

Moderen stod med den ude i Køkkenet, da Lauritzen, uden at banke paa,
overraskede Marie i Stuen.

Han trak hende ned paa sit Skød og kærtegnede hende paa en temmelig
nærgaaende Maade.

Marie rev sit Hoved fra hans kognaksduftende Mund og gav ham en
smeldende Lussing.

»Marie! Er Du tosset?«

»Jeg er til Sinds at give Dem en til. Det kunde maaske lette, for jeg
er saa lynende gal i Hovedet paa Dem og paa mig selv, som har været
ussel nok til at betro mig til saadan en Herre som Dem. Vi passer
ikke sammen. Nu ved jeg det. De maa undskylde, jeg ikke fik det sagt
i Aftes. Nu er det bedst, De gaar.«

»Men Tøs dog, hvad Fanden stikker der Dig!«

»Værsgo'. Skæld bare ud. Det er ikke mer, end jeg har fortjent, naar
jeg forlover mig med én, jeg ikke rigtig har kær af Hjærtet. Gaa nu!
-- De maa ikke være vred. Men jeg kan ikke lide Dem. Det ved jeg nu.
Dem! Og Deres »Redden« og Deres kunstige Breve. -- Men kan De da nu
ikke gaa, Menneske!«

»Hæ, Du er sgu godt tovli'. Men jeg er for Resten ligeglad. Bild Dem
bare ikke ind, jeg bliver ved at gaa og sukke for Dem.«

Han satte Hatten paa. Saa stod han lidt og blev rørt.

»Farvel Frøken Frederiksen. Gud, hvor er De dejlig. -- De kunde gerne
give mig et Søsterkys til Afsked!«

»Gaa nu!«

»Naa, naa lille Missemor; ikke saa stor; det var da ikke første
Gang.« Han slog Armen om hende. Marie tog ham i Skulderen, slængte
ham væk og gik sin Vej.

Lauritzen stod lidt.

»Satans ogsaa. Satans ogsaa. Saadan en dejlig Pige.«

Han tog Hatten af og strøg den blank med Ærmet.

»Naa nu nix verknoten Ferdinand Lauritzen. Du gi'r hende Fanden gør
Du -- den Vasketøs!«

Lauritzen saa sig i Spejlet, trak sit Slips til rette, satte Hatten
flot paa og gik. -- -- --

Efter den Tid holdt Marie sig helst hjemme. Hun var bleven sky for
at komme i Lag med Fremmede. Af og til sendte hun Middagsmad over
til Skolebestyrerinden i Baghuset. Denne takkede pr. Bud, men undgik
Marie, da Laanet endnu ikke var tilbagebetalt.

Det var blevet Maries Livsvisdom, at skulde man gifte sig, skulde man
holde af, saa der var Forslag i det, ellers maatte man helst blæse
alt Kæresteri en lang Marsch og finde sig til Rette i sine Kaar uden
alt for mange Spekulationer; og da hun betragtede det som givet, at
hun ikke kom til at bryde sig noget om Bylapsene, saa behandlede
hun de Herrer, som hun traf i Vaskeriet eller hos Naboens, med en
munter Ro, som virkede afkølende. I Almindelighed troede man hende
forskanset bag en hemmelig Forlovelse.

Naboerne søgte hende meget; hun rakte gerne en hjælpende Haand og var
ikke bange for at sige sin Mening, naar det gjaldt om et godt Raad.
Navnlig tog hun sig af et Pigebarn paa femten Aar, som hun lærte op
til Vask og Strygning og anden huslig Dygtighed, og hvis Tendens til
»Renderi« hun søgte at dæmpe.

Madam Frederiksen sagde rigtignok om Pigebarnet og hendes Søstre:

»De vil til den Side, Marie, og saa kan ti Par Vognmandsheste ikke
slæbe dem til den anden.«

»Det kan da ikke nytte at opgive det ligestraks. De to ældre ... naa
ja, for min Skyld ingen Allarm, naar bare Katinka bliver en ordentlig
Pige; det har jeg nu sat mig i Hovedet, jeg gerne vil have. Hun kan
blive Jomfru hos Konsulinden hjemme; der faar hun det som Blommen i
et Æg, og saa gaar hun da ikke i Hundene som Høkerens Carla.« --

Da Katinka var atten Aar, meldte hendes Moder en Dag Marie, at nu var
det galt fat med Pigebarnet.

Moderen sagde med forarget Mine:

»Jeg gjorde mig jo gal, da jeg saa', hvad der var i Vejen. Men saa
fik jeg jo at vide, at der ikke var noget for Tøsen at stille op;
Kæresten task hende jo, det Bæst.«

Marie tog sig det meget nær og havde en Følelse af Skam, -- havde hun
ikke engang kunnet gøre saadan et stakkels Pigebarn begribeligt, at
hun bare kom ned i Skidtet paa den Maner. --

Hun arbejdede haardt Dagen igennem, men havde dog en ubehagelig
Følelse af, at der var mere endnu, hun burde udrette.

Hvad havde det saa nyttet, da hun søgte at stive en anden af! Katinka
var dog nu alligevel kommen ind i Hvirvlen; nu rendte hun med
Alverdens Mandfolk og saa farlig ud.

Det var dog bedst at leve rolig og tro Menneskene gode og skikkelige,
passe sit Arbejde og af og til at gaa i Theatret og se noget rigtig
kønt. -- Naar Bifaldet rungede op mod Skuespillerne, naar hun paa
Byens Musæum saa Malerier, eller naar hun i Avisen læste om et eller
andet dygtigt Foretagende, var det, som om en Slags piblende, stolt
Glæde gjorde hende varm: der var dog altsaa alligevel nogen, der
kunde udrette noget, overvinde Modstand og naa Maalet, saaledes
som de havde talt og sunget den Dag, da alt samlede sig om at gøre
»Neptuns« Udfart dejlig og uforglemmelig. --

Hun havde faaet indført, at de i Mørkningen hvilede sig et Kvarters
Tid.

Da saa hun helst, at ingen Fremmede forstyrrede dem.

Moderen halvsov i Sofahjørnet. Marie sad tavs med Hænderne foldede
under Nakken, Benene strakt ud og hele det trediveaarige stærke,
kønne Legeme mageligt hvilende, medens Tankerne fløj rundt, eller en
Drøm fangede hende.

Hun var igen kommen til ofte at tænke paa hin Solskinsdag, som bragte
saa mangfoldige og saa festlige Skønheder over det hvide Skib, der
droges langsomt gennem de klukkende, friske Smaabølger.

Med rigtig sikker Glæde mindedes hun ikke al den Festen; der var
som noget uholdbart ved al den Fornøjelse og Stads, selv om det
alligevel var dejligt at se for sig: Søen, Solskinnet, Baadene, hvor
fremmede Mennesker svingede med Hattene, og alle Havnens Skibe, der
var flagsmykkede fra Vandgangen til Flagknappen.

Pludselig kunde hele det flagrende Indtryk af leende, oprømte
Mennesker, smeldende Flag og Søens og Himlens straalende Farver
vige tilbage for et fast Billede: en ung bedrøvet Sømand, der sagde
Farvel til sin Moder. Det gjorde godt at genkalde sig det, -- der var
noget virkeligt og tilforladeligt i det, noget, som ikke helt kunde
forsvinde og blive til ingen Ting.

Mon Hans aldrig tænkte paa den Dag? Hvor mon han var henne i Verden?

       *       *       *       *       *

En Januardag var det efter flere Dages stærkt Snefald begyndt at tø.

Sneen, der var falden saa munter og let, laa nu tung og halvsmudsig;
de vaade Brosten var begyndt at vise sig, Spadseregangenes Træer var
næsten sorte af klam Væde, og Skyerne drev lavt.

Det var Søndag, saa der var ikke mange Folk nede ved Havnen,
hvor Marie langsomt kom gaaende mellem store Stenbunker og mørke
Tømmerstabler.

Yderst ved det store, røde Pakhus laa »Neptun«, hjemkaldt fra England
for at komme under Reparation.

Hans, der endnu var Styrmand ombord, havde fra London skrevet, at
de Portrætter, som de jo nok vidste, at han havde i sin Varetægt
og efter Kaptajnens Ordre kun maatte aflevere personligt, nu snart
skulde komme dem i Hænde.

Det var dem Marie vilde ned at hente.

Hans havde skrevet to Gange, og hun havde svaret; det var falden
hende saa let at fylde Papirets fire Sider, for hun vidste, at hun
gjorde ham godt ved at fortælle om deres Hjem, og hvad der ellers
angik dem. Ogsaa at hun af en Fejltagelse havde været forlovet i 24
Timer. Der var noget af en Bods smertelige Sødme i at bekende dette
for Hans, og det var aabent Spil, han skulde ikke komme hjem og tro,
at hun havde siddet og ventet paa, at han skulde komme og forlove
sig med hende. Hun var ikke af dem, der ikke kunde kende lidt til et
Mandfolk uden straks at tænke sig Forlovelse og den Slags. --

Det skulde blive sært at se »Neptun«, hvor Fader var død, og
underligt at tale med Hans, som havde kendt hende dengang, da hun
endnu ikke vidste, hvad Livet gav.

Saa tog hun et forsvarligt Tag i sine egne Tanker. Hun havde at være
rolig og ikke at faa alt for mange Fornemmelser. Den Ro, som hun
havde væbnet sig med hjemmefra, vilde hun ikke miste.

Men da hun staar her og ser ud i den snevre Kanal, hvor graa Isflager
grøde sig sammen, mindes hun igen hin Udfartsdag, og hun hører
Flagene smelde og ser den unge Sømands taarefyldte, trofaste Øjne.

Og da føler hun med urolig Sorg, at naar hun nu skal se Hans som en
Fremmed og for sidste Gang have noget med Skuden at gøre, saa vil det
være, som det jævnt kedsommelige skrider ned og begraver den lønlige
Sti, der har ført til en aldrig helt glemt Drøm om Kærlighed og Lykke.

For Mindet om Hans, ung og betaget af en ren Sorg, der hævede ham
over Omgivelsernes jævne Lystighed, og Mindet om Skibet, der i
Festdragt, med Forventningens Glans over sig styrede gennem de
solbeskinnede Bølger, -- er dog det, der har vakt det blødeste,
kønneste og det mærkeligste i hendes Sind. -- Sæt, det var en
Ondskab, en grim Handling, der havde været hendes Ungdoms første
stærke Indtryk!

Hun var reven ud af sin sædvanlige Ro, og stærkt og bittert tænkte
hun: »Jeg glemmer Herligheden med »Neptun«, men jeg finder mig ikke
i at glemme Hans, og jeg kan ikke lade være at holde af ham, selv om
han aldrig skal faa det at vide!«

Taarerne begyndte at trænge sig frem, -- hendes Hjærte var saa fuldt
og saa bevæget.

Da samlede hun resolut den sorte Kjole, løftede den omhyggeligt og
gik raskt hen mod Skibet: ingen Scener, ingen Flæben for Folks Øjne!

Det havde Fader ogsaa sagt hin Festdag, da »Neptun«, pudset og
hvidmalet, gled som en stolt Svane ud mellem de grønne Øer.

Der laa Skuden.

Nu var den sortmalet; det rustne Anker var halet op og havde skrabet
den udenbords og afsat røde Streger.

Ved Rælingen stod Mægleren og Kaptajnen, der havde lodden Hue ned
over Ørene og i Munden en kort Pibe, som han gumlede hen i den ene
Mundvig, da han sagde:

»Ja, naar de kommer lidt nærmere Solen og faar mere Tørring, skal hun
ha' en Omgang Pensel; hun er svært forkrabbet.«

Det var rigtignok sandt!

Hvor saa' dog Skibet ud!

Marie gik videre langs Bolværket for at se paa Navnepladen agter.

Standsede pludselig. Hendes Øjne fyldtes af Taarer, og Hjærtet
begyndte at banke.

Oppe ved Rattet stod Hans Holgersen med Tømmermanden, der klarede
Flagstangen, som var knækket i en Storm i Nordsøen.

Tømmermanden lagde Værktøjet og gik ned mod Malerrummet ...

Og Hans, der stod med Ryggen til, vendte sig og gav sig sindigt til
at hejse Flaget.

Dette Billede sænkede sig vældigt og egenraadigt ned i Marie og
mødtes med det Minde, som havde gnavet og pint i stormfulde Nætter,
og naar tjenstagtige Venner havde refereret Rhedernes uvenlige
Bemærkninger om hendes Fader, -- Mindet om, da Flagstangen knækkede,
da han vilde svare de Hilsende i Land.

Men Uhyggen ved det Varsel svandt hen, da hun saa Hans, der støt
og rolig stod der og gjorde Flaglinen fast; Hans, som havde fulgt
»Neptun« saa trofast i alle disse Aar. Og som ikke betragtede hende
som en Fremmed, der var ham og Skibet uvedkommende. Det forstod hun
med stille, lykkelig Jubel, da han opdagede hende og hilste hende.

I den milde, stærke Stemning -- lige vidt fra hin Dags festlige Lys
og fra dennes klamme, skjulende Taage -- fulgte hun med ham ned i
hans Lukaf.

Idet han aabnede Kisten for at fremtage Portrætterne, saa' hun, at
hendes Billede var opklæbet indvendig i Laaget.

Da han mærkede, at hun havde set det, rejste han sig og tog om hendes
Hænder.

De var begge af samme Højde, stod og saa' hinanden fast ind i Øjnene.

Naar Hans paa de ensomme Vagter eller paa slentrende Vandringer i
store fremmede Byer havde tænkt paa Fremtiden, saa var Marie det
Kærnepunkt, hvorom hans Lykketrang dannede en lysende Taage af
Haab og Ønsker. Saa sikkert som noget var hun med, hvergang han
spekulerede over noget særligt, -- -- -- dengang, da han sparede for
at tage Eksamen, og ved Sømandspræstens Juletræ i Hull, da det traf
sig, at han fik et Halstørklæde med Juleønsker fra En hjemme i Byen;
og da han laa paa Hospitalet i New York, efterat han var forlist og
havde mistet alt; og Natten efter den Sommerdag ovre under England,
da hun pludselig røg ud i en Nordvest, og Jungmanden gik over Bord
og druknede lige for Øjnene af ham; -- -- altid var Marie med i hans
Tanker. Hun var jo ogsaa for ham bestandig omgiven af det Mod og det
Haab, som havde været over det hele hin Sommerdag i Sundet. Hvor
akavet det end var gaaet for »Neptun«, saa havde den Skude dog siden
den Dag noget mere over sig end andre Fartøjer, og hvad han saa end
skulde faa at kæmpe med, saa skulde hendes Kærlighed hjælpe ham at
klare det strængeste. --

Han vilde sige hende noget om dette; men en pludselig Jublen over
endelig at skulle dele dette stærke, forhaabningsfulde med hende
fyldte ham med en uvant, forvirrende Magt, der dirrede helt ud i hans
forslidte Hænder, saa at hun uvilkaarlig tog med øm Fasthed om dem.

Han var ikke vant til at forme sine Tanker i Ord, da han ingen havde
havt at skrive til, siden hans Moder døde, og ikke havde læst stort
andet ude i Søen, end hvad han havde Brug for til Eksamen.

Det faldt da saa helt anderledes, end han havde tænkt det.

Men Lykken over ømme Længsler og stærke Følelser, som ikke skyggedes
af nogen Tvivl eller Usikkerhed, Lykken over det nye, mærkelige,
straalende, der foldede sig ud i hendes Sind, da hun saa ham ved
Flaget agter, bringer hende til at fornemme den Glans og Varme,
som er skjult i hans jævne Ord om, at han har Udsigt til at blive
»Neptuns« Fører, da Kaptajnen lægger op efter denne Rejse, og at han
saa kan gifte sig, men at han ikke vil have nogen anden Pige i hele
Verden end hende. --

Da Marie sad hos sin Ven i den snevre, fattige Kahyt, tænkte hun,
greben ind til Roden af sit Væsen, at det var en _Styrelse_, at
Lauritzen havde listet sig saa lumskt ind den Aften, saa at hun var
bleven saa forfærdelig vred og lige med et havde givet ham Afsked;
sæt, hun var gleden dybere ind i det; ja, saa havde hun aldrig
oplevet en Stund som denne sammen med ham, der nu sad og holdt saa
trofast om hende og hviskede om Fremtiden og om den Dag for længe
siden; den Dag, da hendes Sjæl havde optaget et Billede, der -- disse
Aar igennem -- havde været som en Ankergrund, der var Skyld i, at
hendes Tro paa ham og Mindet om ham aldrig helt var skyllet bort fra
hende.




TO SØSTRE.


I den blaa Sommerluft rejste der sig et Sted i Norden en stærk Borg.

Men Borgens Frue havde ikke Sans for Portenes sikre Nagler eller for
Taarne og Tinders stolte Rejsning. For hende var der kun ét: det
Barn, hun havde født Maanedsdagen efter sin Husbonds Død.

Hun tilbragte sine Dage ved Barnets Vugge og mangen Nat lyttende
betaget til dets sagte Aandedrag.

Fra Taarnet vajede intet Banner; i Staldene stod Hestene urørte, i
Skovene drev Dyrene om uden at jages, og de af Svendene, som endnu
var unge, forlod hendes Tjeneste, fordi de hellere vilde binde
Harnisk paa og slaaes af al Magt paa de vide Heder med vrede Fjender
end gaa her i Tryghed og blive gamle og graa bag den Grænse, hun drog
mellem Verden og sig selv og sit. -- --

Der flyver Fugle, der vælder Roser. --

En silde stormfuld Aften kommer en Svend ind med en Byldt, som
han har fundet i den dybe Skygge ved Porttaarnets Mur. Kaaber
og Silkeklæder vikles bort; et Par mørke Barneøjne stirrer mod
Lysskærets Leg paa de blanke Ildbukke ved Ovnen; de se op i
Røgfangets Mørke, og i Blikket dukker en Skygge af Ængstelse frem;
men den svinder, da det fæster sig ved Borgfruens Ansigt.

Da aabnes den sørgmodige Frues Hjærte for det lille, hjælpeløse
Hittebarn, og hun løfter det i sine Arme og tager det til sit Barns
Søster.

       *       *       *       *       *

Og Inger, det var Datteren, og Germa ... det Navn havde man fundet i
en Guldring, der hang om Hittebarnets Hals ... voksede op i Kærlighed
og Ømhed. --

En Solskinsdag stod Moderen i et Vindue og saa ned i Borggaarden,
hvor de to Børn kom gaaende.

Inger gik ens og langsomt. Hun var højere end Germa og havde lagt sin
Arm om hendes Skulder; det jævnede den andens urolige Gang.

Men længe gik de ikke saadan.

Germa sprang af Sted; .. snart jagede hun Duernes Flok i Vejret,
saa de mange flagrende Vingepar lyste i Formiddagssolskinnet; snart
borede hun sine brune Hænder ind i de vilde Rosers Hæk for at faa den
rødeste Rose til Ingers lyse Haar; saa gled hun atter ind i Søsterens
Arm, og de fortsatte deres Vej ... bort under den lave Porthvælving.

Og lidt efter brødes Stilheden af Germas muntre, klare Stemme, der
raabte den kraftige Hilsen, som hun kendte fra Viserne, op til
Porttaarnet, hvor Kurens Plads i Aarevis havde været tom.

Borgfruen vendte sig med et Suk.

Skæbnen raader underligt!

Hun havde sørget og grædt saa saare. Men som Aarene randt hen,
stængte hun med Ensformighed og Stilhed for alt Begær efter Liv og
brusende Lykke.

Og hun gemte Børnene med sig i Flugt for alle groende Haab, fordi hun
vidste, det kunde ske, at Haab blev til Sorg.

Men nu, da Vingerne voksede sig stærke paa den fremmede Fugl, hun
havde lunet i sin ensomme Rede, -- og den flagrede ud, og den kom
hjem og bragte Bud til hendes vintertavse Sjæl om smeltende Sne og om
Muld, der var rede til Frøkornet, -- da veg Glemselen og Stilheden af
hendes Sind, og den meldte sig igen, den gamle Sorg over hendes døde
Herre. -- --

Germa færdedes vaagen og varmblodig vidt ud fra den snevre Stue.
Der var i hendes Spor en Strøm af Liv og Uro og bag alle hendes
Spørgsmaal en kraftfuld Higen efter Viden om Tilværelsen i al dens
Bredde og Dybde. Hun værnede med Ømhed og Undren hver Plantespire,
der blev til af et ringe Frø, og hun lo af Glæde ved at fornemme sin
Hests spændte Styrke, naar hun jog hen ad Markerne. Hun kunde blive
stille af Lykke over Moderens og Søsterens Kærlighed; og naar der
berettedes om Fædrenes daadrige Levned, _lyttede_ ingen som hun --
saa favnende det alt, tagende og ejende det.

Den gamle Krønikebog og de to Helgenlegender, med Riddervaabnet i
Guld paa mørke Læderbind, og de kostelige haandskrevne Dokumenter
blev slæbt ned fra Hylden; naar da Germa stod paa den høje Stige og
søgte paa det fredede Sted, hvor de gemtes, saa blussende ivrig,
at Støvet dansede i Solstriben, da var det noget andet og noget
smerteligere end Angst for, at den lille, faste Haand skulde slippe
sit Tag i den Egetræeskorsblomst deroppe, som gennemfor Borgfruen paa
en saa urolig Maade.

       *       *       *       *       *

Borgfruens hvide Hænder, der i mange Timer taalmodigt havde syet
Roser paa Silkens lyse, bløde Flager, lagde sig til Hvile i hendes
Skød.

Fra de store Loftsbjælker og fra det mørke Egepanels kunstfærdige
Udskæringer rykkede Tusmørket nærmere og nærmere ind paa hende.

Hun rejste sig, gik hen og skød Vinduet op, satte sig paa Vægbænken
i Vinduesfordybningen med Haand under Kind og stirrede ud i Luften,
medens Mynden, der laa ved hendes Fødder, aandede lydløst i rolig
Søvn.

Længe var der stille.

Saa bevægede den brede Dør sig paa sine store Hængsler for Ingers
spinkle Haand.

Mynden rejste sig, gabede lydeligt og strakte sig, saa Skindet
strammede om Ribbenene; der kom Liv i dens sørgmodige Øjne, og den
gik logrende hen til Inger, der venligt strøg over dens glatte, bløde
Hoved, idet hun gik forbi den hen og satte sig paa Hyndet ved Vinduet.

Hun lænede Hovedet til Moderens Skulder, og Moderen kyssede ømt
og let hendes lyse Haar, der mødtes saa smukt med den rene, hvide
Pande; medens det nu var Inger, der saa ud paa Aftentaagerne, hvilede
Moderens Blik ufravendt paa Barnets rolige Ansigt. --

Hvilken Storm skal faa disse lige, fine Øjenbryn til at drage
sig smerteligt sammen, og hvilken Lavhed skal bringe disse blaa,
taalmodige Øjne til at flamme vredt og sorgfuldt.

Saa drog hun hende tættere ind til sig.

Kunde hun holde sit Barn borte fra Verden, -- hvor Lystighed og Kulde
var Herre, -- gemme det hos sig, varmt og trygt, og tilsidst frelse
det med sig i den stille Grav under Kirkens slidte Fliser! --

Der lød Sang udenfor, Klinken paa Døren løftedes, og Germa traadte
ind.

Hun blev ved med sin lystige Sang, medens hun trak Mynden kærtegnende
i Ørene og klappede dens Ryg, saa den velbehageligt kneb Øjnene
sammen; men saa tav hun, løb hen til de to derhenne ved Vinduet og
tog sin vante Plads paa Hyndet ved deres Fødder ...

Og lidt efter begyndte Moderen at synge med en sagte, sødt klingende
Stemme for sine Børn. Helst af alt vilde hun mætte deres Længsler, at
de ikke skulde drage de vilde Stier bort fra hende, ud i Livet, hvor
mangen En bar Kvide i Hjærtet.

Saadan kom en blid og rig Aften tidt og ofte efter en Dag, som, enten
det var Vinter eller Sommer, var kranset af vaagen, trofast Kærlighed.

       *       *       *       *       *

En Sommerdag, da Inger, der nu var vokset til en stolt og høvisk
Jomfru, var gaaet ned til Aaen med en Terne for at to Silke og Lin,
kom Germa løbende. Og som hun sprang af Sted hen ad den grønne Vold,
vinkede hun kaldende paa Søsteren.

Hendes Mund smilte, og hendes Øjne straalede, men hun vilde ikke
fortælle, hvad det var, der havde tændt Glæden hos hende.

Hun tog Inger ved Haanden og drog hende med sig ind i Borggaarden,
ind ad en lille glat, jernbeslaaet, mørk Dør, som Inger aldrig før
havde set aabnet, og op ad en stejl Trappe, hvor Loft, Væg, Trin ere
afslidte, røde Mursten. Smallere og smallere bliver den, jo højere de
stige .... men tilsidst svinge de sig ud af Lugen øverst oppe, og de
staa ved Taarnets Tinde og skærme med Hænderne for Øjnene, der ikke
straks kan se ud i det klare Sollys.

Men snart se de op og ud over det vide Landskab, der blaaner langt,
langt ud -- -- grønne Marker, et enkelt bredkronet Træ, smaa
blinkende Søer, mørke Skove og længst ude -- Havet. Over alt dette et
straalende Sommersolskin og en tindrende blaa Himmel.

-- Inger jublede og strakte sine Arme ud. Hun løb fra Brystværnets
Nordside til dets Sydside, fra Øst til Vest, -- og alle Vegne det
samme -- en Verden, en stor, dejlig Verden, der straalede i Sollys og
ventede i Tavshed.

At eje saa meget vidt og fagert!

Germa sad ubevægelig med Nakken mod den haarde Sten og fulgte med
Øjnene Inger, der var saa ny, som hun stod der; der var i disse Øjne
en Verden, en Verden, der ventede i Tavshed og straalede i ubevidst
Ungdomslykke.

Germa rejste sig pludseligt, gik ned ad Trappen og ind i det øverste
Taarnværelse.

Der stod et stort, sammenrullet Banner hældet op til Muren; hun tog
i Silken og trak Dugen nysgerrigt ud.

Derpaa fik hun Øje paa en lille Kiste paa fire svære Ben, sammenholdt
af et stærkt Kryds.

Hvad gemtes her saa afsides og upaaagtet?

Germa strøg over sit sorte, blanke Haar, som hun plejede, naar noget
betog hende.

Hun vidste ikke selv, hvorfor hendes Hjærte bankede, da hendes varme
Haand greb om den store Nøgle. Hun lo lidt af denne sære Uro, drejede
Nøglen om og aabnede for Kisten.

Der laa en Ring, og inden i den stod »Germa«; det samme Navn kom
frem, da hun havde set lidt paa det snørklede røde og forgyldte, der
stod dernede paa Pergamentslappen, som laa under Ringen. --

Og Hittebarnet læste de faa Linjer, som en vejfarende Munk, til Tak
for Ly og Mad, engang havde prentet om det fundne Barn.

Hun forstod ikke, hvorfor hendes hele Væsen krympede sig af Sorg, hun
harmedes over Taarerne, som blændede hendes Øjne, og uvant med de
Ædderdryp, der sved hendes Sind, vilde hun løbe bort fra dette trange
Rum. Hendes Haand strejfede Banneret; hun vendte sig og tog hastigt
om den tunge Byrde og slæbte den op til Inger.

Og nu blev der Travlhed paa det Taarn, der i Aarevis havde været øde.

To Pigeskikkelser kæmpede for at faa Bannerstagen fastgjort, Banneret
udfoldet. Inger slap Snorene; en sagte Vind spilede Silkedugen ud,
og over hendes Hovede vajede Slægtens blaa Mærke med den gyldne,
flyvende Glente, den som ogsaa havde skinnet i hendes Faders Skjold
den Dag, han faldt mod Rigets Fjender.

De to Jomfruer saa paa hinanden.

Germas Læber bævede .... hvor havde de kunnet tie om dette Dag efter
Dag? Hvorledes skulde hun bære at miste Visheden om en ædel Fader og
en god og statelig Moder? Ak, nu havde de drukket det halve af hendes
Hjærteblod.

Da strakte Inger Armene i Vejret, greb med de slanke, hvide Hænder om
Bannerstagen; Mund og Øje smilte stolt og kækt, og Silken knitrede
og bølgede over hende.

... Men i den Stund følte Germa sig fattig og ene, og i hendes Sind
fæstede den bitre, stærke Udlængsel Bo.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ind gennem de grønlige Ruder, hvor Blyet mange Gange har draget
sine Linjer paa langs og paa tvers, glider det legende Lys i brede,
dæmpede Strømme.

Stabler af Tinfade og Tallerkener staar paa det brede Egebord;
kosteligt vævede Skiveduge ligge Side om Side med farveskønne
Bænkehynder. En Sølvstob, Krus og blanke, tunge Stager med to og
flere Piber skinner; smaa Saltsirkener og enkelte Skeer, hvis lave
Kop er slidt som det udskaarne Benhaandtag, ere skubbede ind, hvor
Plads er i den brogede Dynge.

Inger staar og ser tankefuld paa alle disse hendes Slægts Skatte, som
sjældent kommer frem af de dybe Skabe eller ned fra de lange Hylder
under Loftet. Snart løfter hun paa en af de tunge Stager, snart
glider hendes Haand let hen ad de kølige Linnedduge.

Borgfruen sidder for Enden af Bordet, hvor Skiven er rundet af hendes
Herres og hans Fædres Arme.

Foran hende staar et lavt Skrin med hvide Metalbeslag om det mørke
Træ. Der ligger enkelte Guldkæder deri; men det er ikke dem,
som Borgfruen løfter saa varsomt, -- det er et beskrevet, stivt
Pergament, der rasler, da hun tager det frem.

Hun ser paa den snirklede Skrift, som fortæller om dengang, da hendes
Herre skænkede Gaard og Grund til Kirkens Sankt Andreæ Alter, at
Messer skulde læses for ham og hans og Kongen til evig Tid.

Borgfruen ser op, sukker og fæster det sorgfulde Blik paa Inger, der
bøjer Hovedet dybere.

»Døden er vis, men Timen er uvis. Lad ikke af at vaage og bede i
Bodfærdighed.«

Og hun læser halvsagte videre. --

Germa staar med Ryggen til henne ved Vinduet.

Med Fingeren tegner hun, uden Hensigt, i Karmen efter de smaa
Halvbuer i den røde Mur derovre under Taget.

Bagved sig hører hun Borgfruens sagte dæmpede Stemme, der staver sig
frem gennem Dokumentets Sætninger om de Messer, der skal læses: alle
christne Sjæle til Ro, Lindring og Salighed.

»Ro og Lindring,« gentager Borgfruen tungt.

»Liv og Vildskab,« siger det i Germa. De to derhenne, hendes Kæreste
paa Jorden, lad dem knæle for den tavse Moder, der bøjer Hovedet mod
den kronede Søn, hun bærer paa Armen, lad dem vandre sødt omslyngede
og blidt talende i Rosengaardens tunge Duft; hun elsker dem, hun vil
gøre trælsomt Arbejde for dem og bære det strideste og haardeste dem
til Behag, men der er noget, som kalder bort fra dette stille Sted,
skønt Barneminderne pusler i hver Krog. Her er alting ens, enten
Himlen er høj, blaa og sommerskøn, eller Taagerne graaner, eller
Sneen danser langsomt ned over Borg og Skove. Hun bliver førere i sin
Dragt og maa bøje sig, naar hun gaar gennem Taarndøren, men Dag gaar
som Dag, og Aften kommer som Aften, og saadan vil det vedblive.

Og hun ved, at de Bolstre, hun hviler sit Hovede imod, ere bredte for
hende af Godhed, og ikke fordi hun er deres. Der er ikke det i hendes
Blod, som evigt binder hende til de to derhenne. Hun er ikke Kød og
Blod af den gode Frue og hendes ætstore, modige Herre.

Og hun ligner heller ikke Søsteren. Germa er rank og høj, mørk og
brunkindet. Hun er kraftig og heftig, har Mod til at være kærlig
eller vred, alt som Tid er.

Ingers Legeme er fint, og naar hun kaster sine Klæder og gaar ud i
Vandet, skinner hun hvid og dejlig; hendes Lød er lys, hendes Øjne
ere rolige og blaa. Hun kan tæmme sine Ord, og man ved ikke ret,
om hendes Sjæl kan bølge i Vrede og heftig Kærlighed. Græder hun,
er det i Ensomhed, og aldrig viser hendes Ømhed sig anderledes end
som stille Omsorg. Hendes Pande er som Moderens; naar hun lader
Kammen glide gennem det lange, gule Haar, løfter hun Haanden ganske
som Moderen. Ja, deres Blod rinder i samme Takt, og de ere bundne
til hinanden uløseligt, men hun er det fundne Barn ... den Herre
Christus evigt velsigne den gode Frue, der ikke lod hende falde i
onde Menneskers Vold! --

Fra det øverste af Gavlens Takker fløj en Due op mod den blaa Himmel.

Germa saa langt efter den.

Men saa vendte hun sig og gik forbi Borgfruen og Inger. Deres Blikke
fulgte hende, til Døren lukkedes; to Par Øjne mødtes et Øjeblik ...
Germa er en anden siden hin Dag paa Taarnets Tind; hun tager deres
Kærtegn som en Gave og ikke mere som sin Ret; og hendes mørke Øjne
kan spørge, saa der er kun det at gøre at lægge hendes Hovede mod sit
Bryst og bøje sin Mund mod hendes Pande. --

Men Germa sprang ned ad Trappen, hun stemte sig haardere mod den
tunge Dør end nødigt gjordes.

Da hun stod i den snevre Borggaard, gav hun sig til at løbe ... bort
derfra ... over den gyngende Vindebro -- ad vildsomme Stier langt ind
i Skoven, og der kastede hun sig ned ...

Vage Drømme, der briste, førend de naa ud af Taagen, stryge gennem
hendes Sind, medens Skovens Storhed, -- den, der spirer, og den, der
hvælver sig højt, -- tager hendes smertelige Uro og fylder hende med
en gryende, stærk Livsglæde. --

Saadan er det gaaet mange Gange siden hin Foraarsdag.

Det kan ske for hende, at tunge Anelser med ét kan faa hende til at
løfte Hovedet fra det bløde Mos og stirre ængsteligt frem for sig;
det er, som noget nærmer sig, der kan nedtræde den dybe Glæde, som er
ved at gro op i hendes Sind.

Da kan hun ikke se en Fugl flyve fra Reden, uden at hun synes, den
forvildet _tyer_ til en sikker Kvist, og at dens lille, fjedrede
Moderbryst skælver. Og det er for hende, som de fine, svævende Spind
blive tunge og graa, og som den bløde, blaalige Luft, der legede i
yndig Lethed, bliver tung og kvælende.

Hvorfor blev hun ikke hos de to bag Borgens sikre Mure! Hvorfor var
hun bleven deres, naar hendes Sind og hendes Længsler ikke vilde
gro som deres, -- de to hun elskede og længtes bort fra, som om hun
skulde sørge sig død.

-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --

Germa sad ensom langt inde i Skoven og saa paa en Ulveunge, i hvis
Hjærte hendes Kniv havde siddet.

Hun blussede efter Jagtens Fryd og sugede af og til de røde
Bloddraaber bort, som piblede frem af en Rift i Haanden.

Hun var saa stærk og lykkelig i den Stund.

Da knagede Grene inde i Krattet.

Germa sprang op med Kniven i Haand og funklende Øjne.

Var det Ulvehunnen?

Men snart hørte hun en Hest snøfte; Jernklæder raslede, og en stor
Rytter holdt foran hende. En Svend red frem ved hans Side.

Ridderen gloede dumt paa hende gennem Hullerne i Visiret; saa skød
han det op og lo raat.

»En smuk Terne til at feje Asken af Arnen!«

»Og til at sørge for Ganen og anden Glæde,« smiskede Svenden og red
bag hende.

Germas Øjne løb fulde af Vredestaarer. Der var en Ridse ved
Halsringen. Om hun kunde sætte sin Kniv i der! Men saa skulde hun
slippe Ridderen af Syne.

Svenden red tæt til hende.

I samme Nu satte hun i Løb ind i Skoven.

Bag hende knasede de tørre Blade under Ridderens tunge Hest; lidt
borte knækkede Grene: Svenden red uden om hende. Hendes Kinder
glødede, men hendes Sind var koldt og beslutsomt .... fremad endnu
et Stykke, saa naaede hun Kløften; hun vidste et Sted, hvor Brinken
var stejl og overgroet med sejge Ranker, derhen løb hun, der var hun
stærkere end en Rytter i Jernklæder.

Hendes Hjærte hamrede, hendes Kind piskedes af Kvistene, -- men blot
frem. Han kunde bruge hende til at fede Ulve med, om han fik hende
fat! Anderledes blev hun aldrig i Evighed en Mand til Vilje, som
vilde tvinge hende, en Mand med grove Smil om lystne Læber.

I susende Fart fór det unge, stærke Legeme af Sted, bøjende sig for
Grenene og springende over Bækkene.

Svendens Hest prustede der ved Egen bag Krattet ... saa til den anden
Side ind mellem Træerne. Der laa Svenden lumskeligt skjult; han
sprang ind paa hende, de brødes længe; da Ridderen kom, var hendes
Kræfter ødet, og blodig og forreven sank hun sammen, bedende sagte og
mindeligt om Naade og Frihed.

Men han tog hende hoverende i sine jærnklædte, plumpe Arme, løftede
hende op foran sig paa Saddelen og red bort med hende.

Germa spændte endnu engang sin slanke Krop for at styrte sig fra ham
ned mod Jordens barmhjærtigt knusende Sten; men han holdt hende fast
fængslet i sine grove Arme og førte hende til sin fjerne Borg.

-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --

Og hvor han rider frem, knuses Blomsterne, de løfte sig ikke mere,
drikke ikke mere Duggen, som de gode Nætter skænke.

       *       *       *       *       *

Der red en Ungersvend i vild Galop, saa stærkt, som Fuglene flyve.
Han jog fremad over bløde Enge og ind gennem tætte Skove, hvor
Grenene strøg hans hede Kind, og visne Blade sparkedes op af deres
aargamle Fred.

Han huggede Sporen i Hestens Side og knugede haardt om den brede
Tøjle, for han var vred af Sorg.

Saa ringe, saa lille var da hans Hjærtenskærs Elskov, at den ikke
kunde hindre hende i at følge den fremmede Ridder til Dansen og lytte
til hans Tale, der var sirlig og kruset som Fjedrene i hans Hat. --
Men _hans_ Ord, hendes tro Bejlers Ord gaar hendes Øre forbi, som var
det blot en Vind, der blæste.

Værd var det for en Svend, der brændte af Harm, at ride som en Nar ad
ukendte Veje.

Da standsede Ungersvenden sin Ganger; den stemte Benene fast mod
Jorden og huggede med Hovedet -- utaalmodig over den strammende
Tøjle, -- saa at den lange Manke faldt ud over Bidslet, og Skumflager
fór tilbage paa den svedblanke Krop.

Ungersvenden blev holdende og stirrede frem for sig, for der, hvor
Taarnet rejste sig bag Krattet, der vajede over den takkede, røde
Murrand det blaa Banner med den gyldne, flyvende Glente, som i mange
Aar havde været skjult.

Hallo! Han rev sin Hue af og svingede den. Nu havde han det at melde
om, som vel kunde fange hans Dames Øre.

Og han kastede sin Hest omkring og jog muntert af Sted.

       *       *       *       *       *

Det Budskab sprang vidt over Lande, at Flaget var hejst paa den
ensomme Borg, hvor ingen Fremmed havde været siden Ridderens Død.
Der taltes om det i Færgemandens Hytte og paa Kongens Slot, og det
drøftedes ved Krus og ved Messe, og snart stundede raske Svende og
alvorlige Mænd til Borgen.

De modtoges høvisk med Vin og Mad og den Besked, at naar Germa var
funden og frelst, da var her et Hjem for Glæde og Lykke, hvortil det
vel nok var værd at drage igen.

Og mangen Svend besluttede at fare viden om for at finde Germa; men
saa gik det dog oftest saadan, at i det første gode Staldbroderlag,
der glemtes det ...

Men der var én, Sivard var hans Navn, og han mødte Inger den Dag, han
holdt i Borggaarden.

Saadan et Løfte om at finde og frelse Germa gav han hende, at hun
strøg sine Hansker af og rakte hans Hest Fodret, og -- paa hans
ridderlige Bøn -- spændte hun hans Harnisk og lagde Tøjlen i hans
Haand.

Og Sivard lod sig kun opholde af de Mødende, naar der var noget at
fritte og spørge, og han fór viden om.

       *       *       *       *       *

Den store Ridder laa dorskt sovende i Højsædet. Ølkanden foran ham
var tømt, og han havde lagt det ene Ben op paa Bordet.

Germa stod ved Vinduet. Hendes Sjæl krympede sig saa smerteligt i
Haabløshed og Væmmelse, at hun ingen anden Lindring vidste end at
drømme sig til Barn paa Borgfruens Skød. Men det var som at drikke
en lokkende Gift, der var dejlig at se, men brændte som Luer, naar
den var nedsvælget. --

Døren gik, og Sivard traadte ind.

»Er I Germa?«

»Ja.«

»Er det ham, som forødte Eders Lykke?«

»Ja.«

»I gaa nu til søndre Led og bier ved min Hest, til jeg kommer.«

Germa gik. Gud i Himlen! At opleve Gengældelsens Stund! I Døren
vendte hun sig og sagde barskt:

»Stød dybt!«

Op ad Trappen steg hun til et ensomt Kammer. Hun strøg hans gyldne
Ringe af sin Arm og sine Fingre, rev hans skinnende Kæder af sit
Bryst og slængte dem hen, flængede den stive Gyldenstykkes Kjortel og
den bløde Underdragt af sig, til hun stod nøgen.

Da brast hun i bitter Graad, slog Vindueslugen op og lod den kolde
Vind vælde ind om sig.

Saa kastede hun sine egne Klæder over sig og gik.

-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --

Sivard vækkede den Sovende.

»Ryk Brynjen fra Bjælken. Nu skal Jomfruranet hævnes.«

Den store Ridder lo og væbnede sig.

De sloges længe drabeligt. Sivards Sværdsod sad i Ridderens Side,
men han huggede endnu vældigt. Da tænkte Sivard paa, at Ingers Øjne
var trætte af Taarer, da hun saa paa ham, og han fór mandeligt frem,
og denne Gang hug han Jomfruskænderens Hovede af, saa det drev hen
over Gulvet. --

Ved Leddet holdt Germa paa en stor, graa Hest.

Sivard svang sig paa sin, og de fór afsted over Grønsværet.

Paa en Vej over Heden hørte de bag sig Dønet af den store Ridders
Mænd.

Germa vendte sig. Svenden, som lumskeligt havde fanget hende, red
forrest.

Da bøjede hun sig frem, tog Sivards Hest ved Bidslet og drog den med
sig ind til en Grav, og -- som hun bød -- skjulte Sivard sig bag
Stenene.

Han drog sit Sværd. Germa steg af Hesten.

Da Svenden var ud for dem, gik Germa frem med sin Kniv i Haand.

Hun sigtede roligt, skønt hendes Læber krummede sig i bitter Harm,
og da hun slyngede Kniven fór den ind i hans Strube og sad fast. Med
et Brøl faldt han bagover, gled af Saddelen ned paa Vejen, hvor hans
Hoved slog tungt mod en Sten, saa Skallen brast.

Sivard red frem med Germas Hest; hun svang sig op, og de fór atter
afsted.

Der susede et Par Bolte fra de andre Svendes Armbrøst forbi dem,
men ingen forfulgte dem, thi Vægteren mente, de burde ej raste, men
drage til Gaarden og brygge til sømmeligt Gravøl for deres døde
Herre. --

Siden da talte Germa ikke meget og klagede ikke.

En Nat, da Sivard laa ved hendes Fødder i en stor Skov, mærkede han
vel, at hun lønligt sukkede tungt; da havde han fortalt om Inger,
der spændte hans Harnisk og rakte ham Tøjlen, og hvis Øjne var saa
sorgfulde.

Da de naaede frem mod Borgen, og Germa mødte det første Stod Foler og
saa' de første Glimt af Barndomshjemmets røde Mure og deres Billede
i Voldgraven, gled hun af Hesten, vendte dens Hovede mod den store
Ridders Stald og lod den græsse bort fra hende.

Hun svang sig op bag Sivard, og hun støttede sin Pande mod hans Ryg,
og da hørte han hende græde, som om Gud aldrig kunde løse hende ud af
Angst og Kvide.

       *       *       *       *       *

Da den første sorgfyldte Glæde er omme, vil Inger igen falde til Ro i
det tilvante Hjemmeliv, hvor Sivard som hendes Hjærtenskær skal være
med.

Men Germa er en anden end før.

Vel kan hun nu som i svundne Dage høre paa Eventyr og Sang og gaa
ved Ingers Side og plukke Roser og Gyldenlak, men naar den lyse Dags
vanlige Hændelser ikke mere støtter hendes syge Sind, da brister
hendes Ro, og Sorgen kommer med Natten og sætter sig tungt paa hendes
Sind og skygger for al Tro og al Glæde. --

Ternerne ere gaaede fra Sovestuen, hvor Inger og Germa sove hinanden
nær.

Germa sidder paa Sengestokken, og Inger reder hendes Haar; men Germa
tænker ikke paa, hvor det vælder sort og bølget, hun taler med Ord
saa milde og sagtelig faldende om den Germa, der fri og glad steg op
ad den snevre Trappe til det blændende Solskin paa Taarnets Tind, og
om den Lykke, der fra Barndomsaar til Dødsenstid kunde have groet,
hvis det vrede Lyn ikke blindt havde ramt og slaaet et Saar, hvorfra
Livet rinder ud. -- --

Fra Skabesengens Mørke ser Inger mod det fattige Skær af Dag, der
driver ind gennem Vinduets Ramme.

Der trænger sig over Søsterens Læber andre og haardere Ord, og af dem
staar der som en Dødskulde, der bringer Inger til at skælve.

Søsterkærlighedens Varme ejer Germa ubeskaaret, og derfor gemmer hun
trøstende hendes Haand i sin.

Inger sukker tungt, fordi det kommer over hende som en ængstende
Alvor, at der er den Vaande, som kan skille fra al Glæde, og den Nød,
som aldrig kan forvindes. --

Og Germa døde den Dag, da den første Sne dalede let over de hærgede
Skove og over de ensomme Veje.

       *       *       *       *       *

I Kirkens Halvmørke har Inger ligget knælende paa Flisen, som dækker
Søsterens Grav.

Og hun har -- medens Tankerne flagrer i dybe vildsomme Dale -- læst
og læst de fromme, kosteligt hugne Ord om den, hvis Legeme hviler
her, men hvis Sjæl er hos Gud.

Hendes Hjærte er tungt af en Sorg, som man ikke drømmer sig til og
fra, men som er der altid, og som altid er der lige knugende, fordi
det er den, der har løftet bort fra den jævne Vej, hvor Fødderne gik
deres vante Gang. --

Langsomt vandrer hun hjem ad den ensomme Sti.

I Borgportens dybe Skygge staar hun stille. Hendes Bryst gaar mod det
strammede Klæde og den hvide Halsdug, og hendes Blik glider uroligt,
som vidste hun ikke det Sted, hvor Hvilen er.

Da ser hun en Ternes Ansigt i en Vinduesglug, og rank gaar hun ind i
Gaardens Solskin og hen mod den lille Dør i Taarnet.

Her er Stilhed og Halvmørke.

Men det tvinger hende kun dybere ned i den Sorgfuldhed, der ligger
som en mægtig Orm og ruger over hendes Ungdoms Skatte.

Hun hører raske Mandstrin, og hun ved, hvem det er.

En Kilde af Jubel springer op i hendes Sind og skyller funklende og
friskende gennem hver lønlig Krog.

Der er jo den Svend, som hun har valgt, fordi han ung og modig og af
Kærlighed til hende stred for at bringe Søsteren tilbage; det er jo
hendes Herre, som hun vil give sin Tro og have kær i Glæde og i Sorg.

Og han magter vel at tage Byrden fra hende.

Hun rejser sig og skyder Døren op, saa Solen vælder ind i en bred,
støvfyldt Stribe. --

Sivard gaar mod Borgporten.

Hans Læber ere pressede mod hinanden, og han tvinger sine Tanker til
at mindes den stormende Fylde af Ungdomsmod og Kærlighedslængsel, som
tumlede i hans Sind, da han red gennem Verden og tjente for den, som
har lovet at være hans, men som er en Fremmed selv i hans Armes Hjem.

Det er ikke Sørgen og Minder, han har higet imod.

Hans Vilje har været til at drikke et glad Bryllup og føre en stolt
og yndig Brud til sin Gaard, at sidde ved en statelig Husfrues Side
som Herre ved sit eget Bord blandt ædle Gæster og, naar Tid er, hejse
Sejl i Raa og styre frem over dybe Strømme til Kampe, hvor ingen vil
vige.

Kampe, hvor ingen vil vige!

Viger han ikke daglig fra dristig og fordrende Tale, og fremtvinger
han ikke stilfærdigere Ord, end hans Sind er til, fordi han kun
gennem dem vinder hendes nølende Kærtegn, som han længes imod ....

Da ser han hende staa i Døren, og han mindes hendes bløde Haands
Hvile i hans, og langsomt gaar han imod hende, og hun sætter sig paa
Trappen, og han slænger sig paa det nederste Trin.

Da han ser, hvor blege hendes Kinder ere, bliver han vel trang i
Sind, men der fødes ikke det Ord af hans Kvide, som kan tage hendes
Nød og stille hendes Sorg.

Inger ser ned paa dette bøjede Hovede og denne dunede Kind, der
sænker sig dybere, som begærede den Hvilen mod hendes Knæ.

Det er, som Taarer stiger højere og højere i hende og slæber efter
sig en mørk Angst.

Hun venter og venter .... ogsaa i denne Time forgæves; og han sidder
tavs, medens Minut drypper til Minut og øger den skillende Strøm.

Hvorfor er hun ikke glad, naar hendes Hjærtenskær dog er hos hende?

Er han da ikke den Mand, som kan tæmme hendes Sorg?

Han slynger Armene om hende og knuger sit Hovede mod de fine Knæ, der
runder sig under Kjolens Folder.

Men da er det for hende, som han er en fremmed Svend, med hvem hun
aldrig har nævnt Kærlighedens Navn, og det ridser sig ind i hende med
eneraadende Magt, at den Dag vil aldrig komme, da hun vil lægge sit
Hovede ved hans Bryst og gro ind til den Lykke, som vil læge alle
Saar og blænde for alt Savn.

Og hun rejser sig, og paa ærlig Vis siger hun ham dette.

Han føler et Øjeblik, som al hans spændte Kraft langsomt slappes,
men da han ser hendes Mund og mindes, at han har maattet tvinge sig
ind paa lange Omveje for at opnaa, at den givende bøjer sig mod hans,
da flammer det op i ham med en vred Glæde som hos den, der kaster en
Lænke.

Han gaar mod Døren.

Der standser han.

Men da Sporens Klirren tier, hører han hendes Kjoles Strygen mod
Murværket og hendes lette, rolige Trin opad Trappen, og da løfter han
Benet, sparker Døren op og gaar mod Stalden og sadler sin Hest ...

Inger staar ved Borgetind og ser langt ud over den flade, solnydende
Mark.

Det dundrer over Vindebroen, det blinker i en Staalhue, Solskin leger
blankt over en Hingsts brede Bringe. Det er Sivard, der farer af
Sted, saa det gnistrer af Vejens Stene.

Angst lytter Inger efter, om der ikke er et eneste kaldende Raab i
hendes Sjæl efter ham, men der er kun Visheden om, at den Leg, de
leged, er ude.

Nu hører hun ikke mere Hovenes gungrende Trav. Den urolige Skygge af
Rytter og Hest bliver mindre, forsvinder i en Sænkning. Han rider
frem igen ovre ved Skovens blaanende Væg; ... der rejser han sig i
Sadlen, sætter Horn for Mund og blæser stærkt og uden Melodi.

Saa vender han sin Hest og rider ind i Skyggen.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tavs og stolt gik Inger sin Gang. Selv om Visheden om hendes Hjærtes
Tavshed og Tomhed kan brænde som Baal og lægge al Fryd øde, kommer
den Mørkningstime ikke mere, hvor hun skyder Døren op og søger hen
til Moderen, der sidder ene paa Vægbænken og drømmer Slotte af Lys og
Lykke for sit eneste Barn ...

Ingen, ikke engang hun selv, skal have faste Ord for, at hun ikke er
rolig og ikke slider sin Slægts Silke og Skind med stolt Glæde, men
med Længsel efter svundne Dages Stilhed, der, engang brudt, aldrig
bliver mere.

       *       *       *       *       *

Inger gik i Solskinnet og plukkede Rose efter Rose og aandede deres
søde Duft. Hun saa paa Træerne, der voksede opad med smaa, lyse Skud
løftende sig frem paa de krogede, graa Grene.

Men Inger syntes, det var tungt at leve ...

Hun gik op ad Trappen til Fruerstuen, hvor alle de smaa Terner vævede
og sang og talte om Troldskabsfærd, om raske Svende og mandelig Strid
og om Elskovs stærke Baand.

Og Inger satte sig tavs ved Væven, og Skytten gik sin Gang.

Og Hjorten sprang i Skoven, og Dronningen gik alene ind mellem
Stammerne.

Og medens Jomfruerne sang om Kongedatteren, som gav sig og sin Faders
Lande til Hr. Riboldt, tænkte Inger paa, at hun véd, at der drager
den Svend gennem Verden, hvis Hjærte vil le i hans Bryst, om hun
sender ham et kaldende Brevskab ... Men som hun tænker den Tanke,
driver Angstens Dug over hendes syge Sind, for det ved hun, at det
er ikke ham, der kan kysse hendes Mund, til dette Sørgmods Trolddom
viger fra hende, og hun igen er en varm og fager Jomfru ...

Længe var der stille, saa stille, at den, som lyttede, kunde høre
Sommervindens sagte Kog i Voldgravens Siv.

Der var en Jomfru, der begyndte at synge, og de andre stemte villigt
i med Omkvædet.

    Vilmund og hans væne Brud
    -- Strengen er af Guld --
    de legte Tavl i hendes Bur.
    Saa liflig legte han for sin Jomfru.

    De legte Tavl med Guld saa rød,
    og se da græd den væne Mø.

    Hvergang Guldterning randt paa Bord,
    den Jomfru fælded saa modig Taar'.

    »Hvad heller for Guld I græde?
    eller for gode Klæde?

    Græde I Guld, eller græde I Jord?
    Hvad heller den Svend I har givet Tro?

    Græde I Saddel, eller græde I Hest?
    eller den Svend, der Eder haver fæst?«

    »Ikke for Guld jeg græder,
    og ej for gode Klæder.

    Jeg græder ikke Guld, jeg græder ikke Jord,
    saa gerne da gav jeg Eder min Tro.

    Jeg græder ikke Saddel, jeg græder ikke Hest,
    alt med min Vilje haver I mig fæst.

    Mere græder jeg for mit gule Haar,
    at det skal raadne i Vendelsaa.

    Mere græder jeg for Blide,
    som jeg skal over ride.

    Jeg maa vel græde for Blidebro,
    der sunke ned mine Søstre to.

    Der sunke ned mine Søstre to,
    den Tid de lod deres Bryllup bo.

    Og det var mig spaaet, medens jeg var Barn,
    at jeg skulde drukne min Bryllupsdag.«

    »I skulle ikke græde for Blidebro,
    den lader jeg alt med Jærne slaa!

    Jeg lader bygge den Bro saa bred,
    hun koster mig tusend Gylden i Fæ.

    I skulle ikke græde for Blide:
    mine Svende skulle med Eder ride.

    Tolv ved hver Eders Side,
    selv holder jeg Bidsel og Mile.«

    Han lod lægge under Gangeren røde Guldsko,
    og saa rider hun til Blidebro.

    Men der hun kom der midt paa Bro,
    da snaved hendes Ganger i fire Guldsko.

    Hendes Ganger skrænted paa femten Guldsøm,
    neder sank den Jomfru for striden Strøm.

    Jomfruen rakte op sin hvide Hand:
    »Vilmund! Vilmund! Hjælp mig til Land.«

    »Hjælp Dig saa sandt nu den Hellig-Aand,
    som jeg Dig ikke nu hjælpe kan.«

    Hr. Vilmund taler til Smaadreng sin:
    »Du hent mig flux Guldharpe min!«

    Vilmund tager Harpe i Hænde,
    han ganger for Strømmen at stande.

    Han slog Harpen saa saare,
    det hørtes over alle de Gaarde.

    Han slog Harpen over den By,
    og Fuglen af den høje Sky.

    Han slog Løv af Lindetræ
    og Hornen af det levende Fæ.

    Han slog Bark af Birke
    og Knappen af Mari-Kirke.

    Han slog mer end han skulde:
    han slog de Lig af Mulde.

    Han slog Harpen af ret Harm:
    han slog sin Brud af Troldens Arm.

    Op kom den Trold fra Bunde
    med Hr. Vilmunds Mø ved Haande.

    Og ikke hans Brud alene,
    men baade hendes Søstre væne.

    »Vilmund! Vilmund! stil din Ljud!
    Her haver Du igen din unge Brud!

    Vilmund! Du stil din Runeslæt!
    Baade nu hver som han haver Ret!

    Vilmund! Vilmund! Tag din Mø.
    Du lad mig volde mit Vand under Ø!«

    »For vist skal jeg vinde min væne Mø,
    men aldrig skal Du volde Vand under Ø.«

    Vilmund, han legte den Trold til Men:
    han sprak i de haarde Flintesten.

    Hr. Vilmund han red sig op under Ø
    -- Strengen er af Guld --
    saa drak han Bryllup med sin Mø.
    Saa liflig legte han for sin Jomfru.

Der var stille.

Den Terne, som havde sunget for om den mægtige Vilmund, der friede
sin væne Mø fra Trolddom og Fare, sad med Hænderne hvilende og saa
frem for sig med et lyst og yndigt Blik.

En anden begyndte paa Visen om Jomfru Gloriant, der gik til
Fangetaarnet og bad Holger om Hjælp mod den lede Burmand og siden
løste hans Brynje og tog ham i sin Arm.

Men for Inger kom den Stund, at det drog gennem hendes tugtige Sind,
at bedst var det, om en stor Elskov maatte tvinge hende og lægge sit
gyldentrøde Lys over den graa Tid.

Da hvilede hendes Hænder, hun bøjede Hovedet mod Væven, og Taarerne
randt stille ...

Men alle de smaa Terner sang sagtere.

       *       *       *       *       *

Glæden har brede Vinger, og den stærkeste Bølge kan brydes. --

Der kom en Dag, da ædle Gæster holdt for Gaarden.

Borgfruen sad ene og lod Timerne drive deres rolige Vej, da en Svend
meldte om det sjældne Syn af stampende Heste og statelige Herrer og
Fruer.

Borgfruen rejste sig saa hastigt, at Mynden, der havde siddet
logrende og set paa hende, glammede højt ...

Gud i Himlen, sad hun ikke her med Disk og Dug, med en fager Datter
og Mindet om en høvisk Ridder at værne om og saa ...

hun tørrede langsomt en Taare bort, der gled ned over Kinden ...

saa burde den Tid vel komme nu, da andre skulde hylle hendes Barn i
den lune og lystige Fryd, som al hendes Kærlighed ikke havde evnet at
skabe.

Og Mjød og den klare Vin bares frem, og de brede Borde dugedes for
stolte Mænd og gode Kvinder, og da Dansen gik i Gaarden, var det
Inger, der ung og fin dansede forrest, medens Moderen syntes, at nu
bar det igen mod en blid Sommer, hvor al Sorg skulde forvindes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Og som Foraaret blev til Sommer og grønne Spirer til vuggende, gult
Korn, strømmede Gæster til. Og med lige Glæde tog Borgfruen imod dem
alle, baade mod dem, som kom ridende med hundrede Heste og Kjortel og
Kappe af Skarlagen, og mod dem, som kom med Landevejens Støv paa den
simple Vams ...

Men Ingers Hjærte er som lagt i Tvang, skønt hendes Læbe har baade
Smil og muntre Ord.

Men hun har ikke mange Timer til at dukke i sine ensomme Tankers
Væld, for neppe tier de klingende Jægerhorn, før Piber og Giger falde
ind med deres lange, syngende Raab om Dans og Fest.

Dødt og tomt er der i hende, som hun gaar der i den bølgende,
vekslende Skare af Mænd og Kvinder, der er, som de glide af Sted paa
en bred Strøm, hvorover muntre Ord og kække Øjekast farer som Blink
i Skjold og Sværd, naar Solen skinner en frisk Turneringsdag.

Dette var ikke Livet, som hun havde anet det, da hun stod ved
Taarnets Tind og bød det et jublende Velkommen. --

Der er mangen en rask Svend, som helst ser derhen, hvor Inger er, og
mangen ædel Ridder, der vil fæste hende med Tugt og Ære.

Men der er kun én ... han ejer baade Riddersværd og Sangens Gave ...
der, naar Dansen eller Dystridtet gaar, tumler sin Hest paa den vide
Hede, fordi hellere vil han være borte fra hende end lide den Kval,
han lider, naar han ser hende smile, hvor hun helst vilde græde.

Kærlighed er stærk; den kan vel fælde den stejleste Mur.

Og han faar vel de Ord -- om blide eller ramme, -- der kan vinde ham
Jomfruen.

Saaledes tænker Sangeren, og han vandrer sin Vej, som han maa, og er
igen paa Borgen.

       *       *       *       *       *

Der kommer en Time, hvor Jernet springer af hendes Sind, og hendes
hele Hu vender sig mod ham. --

Gigers og Fløjters lystige Lyd dør hen. Ridderne slippe den, de i
Dansen fører ved Haand. Omkring paa Bænkene rejser man sig for at
se ind i Salen. Der bliver saa stille, at man hører to Unges tyste
Hvisken, som straks tier.

Alle se forventningsfulde paa den ridderlige Sanger, der staar midt
for den brede Dør. Hans Legeme vidner om ædel Byrd, og hans Blik er
fast og hærdet i Vilje, og det er skønt af Kærlighed; og der er over
ham den Tankens rene, kraftige Højhed, som drager dem alle i lyttende
Kreds om ham.

Og han synger.

Det luer og gnistrer af hans Ord, og der staar Flammer mod Himlen af
den ubesmittelige Ild.

Inger følte sig sælsomt greben, som var det for _hendes_ Freds Skyld,
at dette skete, og fordi hun sad langt borte, rejste hun sig og gik
nærmere.

Da sænkede hans Blik sig og fæstede sig ved hende, og Stemmen bøjede
sig til milde Ord om Solopgangstimens Kærlighedsbud, naar de spæde
Sædspirer og Pilens smaa rødlige, sammenkrympede nye Blade staar og
gror med Nattens Dug over sig, naar alle Fugle synge og pippe og
fløjte, hver som de kan bedst, men aldrig som ved den klare Dag.

Og hans Stemme bøjede sig til inderlige Ord -- om Aftenen, naar en
eneste Stjerne lyser over de skære, grønlige Farver fra den svundne
Sol, naar der ikke er anden Lyd end den af Agerhønen, der kalder paa
sin Mage inde mellem det tunge, gule Korn, og Lyden af _hans_ Trin,
der gaar de ensomme Stier for at sænke sig i dybe Drømme om én eneste.

Og som han sagde det, var det, som Ord blev ham for trange, og han
løftede den brede viëlle mod sin Kind og spillede over dens Strenge
med den lydige Bue.

Og det klang saadan, at to barske Mænd, mellem hvem Fjendskabet havde
skaaret sin dybe Rende, og de rakte hinanden Haand. -- Kvindeøjne,
der altid havde været sørgmodige, smilte, som var al Sorg forvunden.

Og Inger vidste, at hvis hun ikke havde været, havde Strengene ikke
tonet.

Og da tænkte hun: »Nu har vi to, han og jeg, sammen løftet en Byrde,
og saa maa han gaa hen til mig, tage med sine Hænder om mit Hovede
og bøje det ind til sig, og siden vil vi aldrig skilles hverken Dag
eller Nat.«

Og han sang igen ... med Blikket ud over dem, som seende ind i store
Skove, de ikke kende og aldrig vil naa.

Men Ingers Hjærte er ved at sprænges af en frodig, rodfast Lykke, for
det véd hun, at derind skal hun vandre med sin Haand i hans.

Og hele den store Skare fik det at se, at Inger ... med Dødens Alvor
og Livets Varme i sit unge Sind .... at stolten Jomfru af sig selv,
traadte ud af Kredsen, nærmede sig mere og mere, og da de sidste
Toners Klang var forbi, gled ind i hans Arm og bøjede sit Hovede mod
_ham_. --

Saaledes vandt han Jomfruen.

Og nu kan det siges med Sandhed, at Glæden er kommen i Gaarde.

De, hvis Tanker har været ude paa en ond Færd, følte, at det lede
Troldskab i deres Sind vredes op med Rode; de, hvis dybeste Længsler
hilstes af hans Sang, og de, hvis sorgfulde Hjærter løstes af Pine,
løb jublende imod ham.

Og han slap hende af sine Arme og rakte hende sin Haand, hun lagde
sin i hans, og Borgfruen og gamle, kloge Riddere lagde deres over,
og de klappede dem paa Ryggen, som Fædrenes Skik var, og fra det var
sket, regnedes Sangeren og Inger for Fæstemand og Fæstemø at være.

Og de blanke Sølvbægre klang, og Ord fløj til den, de maatte. Gamle
barske Mænd brummede deres Ungdoms minderige Sange, og Fruer med
spæde Stemmer nynnede med.

Det var fagert at lytte til Bruset af Glæden.

I den høje Sal og i den lune Borgestue bar Sang og Dans gennem
Timerne, til det begyndte at lysne i Øst. -- --

Naar Solen stiger, smelter Rimen af Skoven.

       *       *       *       *       *

Inger og Sangeren gik under Lindene i den blide Sommernat.

Og ved det Stevne fik hun Lykken, hvis Plads hun havde værnet i sit
Hjærte gennem onde Aar.

Som Minut dryppede til Minut, fæstede Kærlighedens stærke Rødder
sig fastere om hver Tanke, hver Længsel og hvert spirerigt Haab, og
i hendes Sind ridsede det sig ind med eneraadende Magt, at der var
ingen Svend til i Verden uden ham, under hvis Kappe hun nu gik, som
hun kunde give sin Tro, for med ham vilde hun leve og dø, og ham
vilde hun følge, om saa Jorden skulde briste under dem.

For han var den Mand, som hun elskede. --

Og alle Jordens Urter stod i Blomst.

       *       *       *       *       *

Og Tiden kom, da Inger spændte Brudesko om sin hvide Fod.

Men hendes Vej til Kirkens Brudebænk gik hen over Søsterens Grav, og
hendes Blik sænkede sig og læste den prydede Flises stive Bogstaver:

»Her bor Germas Legeme, men hendes Sjæl er hos Gud«. --

Og alle de dybe Vande og alle de vundne Riger!




REKREATION.


Paa en af de mere afsides Bænke i Provinsbyens Lystskov sad en
Sommeraften et gammelt Par.

_Han_ havde lænet sig tilbage med paatagen Hjemmevanthed og
betragtede opmærksomt de Spadserende og holdt Øje med de Herrer
Musici, der stod samlede i smaa Klynger paa den aabne Estrade, hvor
de snart skulde begynde at musicere.

_Hun_ sad yderligt, omtrent uden at røre sig; hendes lille, magre
Skikkelse skjultes næsten helt af et stort, sort Sjal, og lige
fra den furede Pande og til Nakken dækkedes hendes Hovede af en
vindrueprydet, mørk Tøjhat.

Af og til knipsede han med mange Omstændigheder Asken af sin
Cigarstump og lagde, lidt besværligt, det ene Ben over det andet, saa
at de snævre Benklæder trak sig et Stykke op over Vandstøvlerne.

De to gamle talte ikke meget. Sagde han en lille Bemærkning, smilede
hun lidt og svarede ja eller nej ...

En tyk Madam med rappe Bevægelser og et Par Børn efter sig gik flere
Gange forbi og saa opmærksomt paa Manden og Konen.

Saa blev hun staaende foran dem og sagde:

»Go' Da'! Er det ikke gamle Skoma'er Frandsens?«

Manden rørte sin Hat med Pegefingeren og svarede:

»Jo, det er saamænd.«

»Ka' De ikke kende mig?«

»Ja, det er jo saadan, vi ser jo ikke saa maj' u'mærket, ska' jeg si'
Dem!«

»Det var jo mig, der var Bypi'e hos gamle Apoteker Friises, da De
boede i Ba'gaarden!«

»Herregu' er det det. Hva' he' De? -- Ja, de er dø'e nu, hele
Familien, Herregu' ja.«

Man gav hinanden Haanden og Skomageren vedblev:

»Vil De ikke sitte ne'? Værsgo', Madam.«

»Aa, la' gaa da.«

»Det er vel Deres?« Han pegede med sin Stok efter Børnene, der
øjeblikkelig var løbne hen til Dansepladsen og havde givet sig til at
klatre og krybe gennem Stakittets Tremmer.

Madammen rejste sig hurtigt, gik et Par Skridt frem, saa at det sorte
Kjoleskørt svingede over den brede Bag.

»Hans Petter, Thea, læg Hattene herhen.«

Hans Peter og Thea smed hellere end gerne Hovedtøjet og sprang af
Sted igen.

Manden spurgte:

»Er De gift?«

»Ja, jeg er,« svarede hun roligt.

Den gamle Mand fortsatte Samtalen; han talte langsomt og vægtigt;
hans Ægtehalvdel og sædvanlige Tilhører plejede ikke at mangle
hverken Tid eller Taalmodighed.

»Me' Forlov, Madam, hva' er Deres Mand?«

»Ja, vi er jo Værtshusholder u'e ve' Markedspladsen. Det er vos, der
har Ma'kisser u' te Fortovet me' Borde og Stole!«

Den gamle Kone vendte sig lidt og saa paa hende, men indtog straks
igen sin Stilling yderligt paa Bænken; de andre talte bag hendes Ryg.

»Det er s'men helt rart at komme lidt u',« konverserede Madammen.

»Er det første Gang, De er i Skoven!«

»Ja, sidste Aar ku' det sgu ikke naa sig; om Sønda'en har vi jo
travlt, og nu paa Søndag kommer der Særkus, det gi'r jo altid no'en
Fortjeneste; men saa var 'et jo, at Kar'sellen gle' i Da', saa mente
jeg, at nu sku' det vær'.«

»Ja, vi har jo osse sku' været a' Ste' hele Somren; men Mutter har
ikke ment, hun ku' være fra Huset. Saa i Dag saa maatte jeg sgu
ligefrem befale hende at trække i Strøtøjet.«

De to gamle lo fornøjet.

Manden fortsætter, henvendt til Madammen.

»Saa har De det vel helt godt?«

»Ja s'men, det har vi jo da. Sli'e maa vi jo naturligvis. Men nu ka'
de to ældste Pi'er da hjælpe te i Geskæften.«

»Naa, De har fler' end de to der?«

»Vi har havt femten.«

»Det var manne Børn,« siger den gamle Kone stilfærdigt.

Madammen tilføjer:

»Men de fem er da dø'e.«

»Saa er de bevaret!« siger Manden, der ser ud, som han har opgjort et
noget vanskeligt Regnestykke.

»Den sidste ha'e vi paa Sy'ehus i fem Aar.«

»Hvor maje maatte De betale dér?«

»Ja, det var strenge nok, det var hal'a'en Krone om Da'en. Det sidste
Aar nøjedes vi da med en Krone.«

»Ja, det løver sgu op, gør'et.«

»Min Mand er jo ellers hos Boubinder Knap.«

»Hva' ka' det nu saadan smi'e a' sig, særka?«

»Ha' faar jo to Kroner om Da'en, men saa er'et jo godt fast Arbe',
og saa er 'et jo det, vi osse maa betragte, at er'et en Da', der er
travlt eller Marke', saa ka' ha' si'e: i Dag, Mester, kan jeg nu ikke
komme; og saa er der ikke vi'ere ve' det, saa hjælper ha' te' hjemme.«

»Ja, der ka' jo være nok.«

»Ja, vi har s'men ikke saa lidt; der ka' godt komme Folk drattende
ind, som De sku'te tænke det!«

»Saa, ka' der det?«

De gamle vendte sig spørgende mod Madammen, som beredvillig fortsatte:

»Jo, forle'en kommer s'men denne her Greve, hva' det nu er ha'
he'er.«

»Uh ha,« siger den gamle Kone i en blid Tone og med et Smil.

»Ha' vilde jo ha' en Ølbajer, som de si'er Soldaterne. Og Trine var
s'men li'e ved at falde i Baldaane af Forbavselse, men Fatter var da
hjemme, og han sto' jo saa og g'ore Karosser for ham, saa jeg ku' jo
nok se, det var i lidt fint!«

»Saadan no'en prutter ikke i no'en Slavs Forretning!« sagde den gamle
Mand sindigt og vægtigt. »Kommer de ind i en Botek, saa si'er de
bare: vil De sende det, hvor maje har jeg at betale? Væsgo'. Vupti.
-- Basta.«

»Naar d'itte har for langt te Kontanterne!«

De lo alle tre.

Madammen vedblev:

»Ha' kom jo u'e fra Eksercissen.«

»Je' har osse været Soldat. Sikken et Bryst je' ha'e den Gang. Ikke
Mutter?« Manden retter sig og ordner lidt ved den hvide Krave, der
hænger slapt om det indfaldne Bryst. »Nu har je' tidt lidt Hoste, men
saa er det sundt at komme u' i frisk Luft.«

»Det er'et vel,« svarede Madammen ligegyldigt. »Vi faar nu sommeti'er
Fribillæt til Særkus. Lidt Fornøjelse ska' man jo unde sig.«

»Ja, lidt Fornøjelse skal man unde sig,« gentog den gamle Kone med
sin trætte Stemme.

»Ja, Mutter gaar nu paa Kirkegaarden en Gang imellem.«

Konen saa mildt op.

»Je' har jo gamle Bekendtere deru'e.«

»Saa vasker hun deres Ligsten,« fortæller Manden.

»Det var da et farligt Mas! Slæver De Remedjerne me' deru'?« spørger
Madammen.

»Det er jo bare en bitte Sæve og en Børste i en tom Spand,« svarer
den gamle Kone.

»Hun var nu i 53 me' Etatsraa' Plums i Flensborg; hun tjente dem i 10
Aar, før vi kom sammen, ska' jeg si'e Dem, Madam.«

»Det er Etatsraa'ens Sten den store me' Billedet lige inden for
Laagen,« oplyser den gamle Kone. Efter en lang Pavse vedbliver hun:
»Jeg kender jo osse gamle Fru Møller og Julie Lind, de ligger ne'
etter Krigsgravene. Det er jo saadan li'som gamle Bekendtere.«

»Er De ellers rask, Madam Frandsen?«

»Vi maa'tte klave. -- Rosken aa Bry'en i Lemmerne. -- Herregu' ja.«

»Det kniver, Mutter, naar du ska' lette dig om Maarnen,« siger Manden
i en opmuntrende Tone. »Christian, vores Søn, han er nu Mursvend, og
han ska' jo ha' Kaffe om Maarnen, inden han gaar.«

Den gamle Kone fortsætter paa sin rolige, blide Maade: »Saa ska' jeg
jo ha' redt Seng og fejet Gullerne, og saa skal jeg jo te og lempe en
bitte Middesma', til Christian kommer hjem. -- Saa kan jeg s'men være
saa træt, saa træt,« siger hun som til sig selv.

»Du har nu slidt al din Ti', Mutter!« Manden klapper hende muntert
paa Ryggen.

Hun smiler. »Naar jeg saa har sittet to, tre Timer me' min
Strikkestrømpe, saa er jeg li'som helt rask igen.«

»Ja, hænge i maa vi sgu!« udbryder den tykke Madam pludselig paa sin
raske, energiske Maade og slaar sig paa Benene.

»Ja, det er ikke saadan at komme frem,« siger Manden, og langsomt
fortsætter han: »Er man saa i Stilling, saa er det svært at holde
sig. Min Søn, han ku' nu ikke.« Han hæver Stemmen: »Men jeg kan; jeg
holder den nok, jeg holder den nok gaaende i den Ti', vi har te'ba'e.
Ikke Mutter? Der er jo det me' Botek og Reklama, som de raaver paa,
og trykte Anbefalingskort, og der er jo manne Skoma'ere nu, men mine
gamle Kunder glemmer mig ikke -- nej, mine gamle Kunder glemmer mig
ikke.«

De faldt i Tanker alle tre.

Ovre fra den anden Del af Skoven lyder Tonerne af et Par skrattende
Horn, der ustandseligt spille Socialistmarchen.

Det kommer nærmere og nærmere. Til sidst hører man enkelte Stemmer,
der om og om igen synge: nu dages det Brødre, det lysner i Øst.

Toget gaar forbi.

Det er de to Rækker, der ere Orkestret nærmest, som synge. De andre,
Mænd med Madkurve og Koner, der trille Barnevogne eller have Børn paa
Armen eller ved Haanden, gaa i rolig Passiaren; nogle enkelte hilse
paa Skomageren.

»Det er dem, der strikker!« hvisker han til Madammen, der ser med et
underlig blandet Udtryk efter den lille Klynge.

Da den er borte, siger Manden vemodigt:

»Der gaar nu de og driver.«

»Ja, det er ikke til at forstaa, hva' der ska' komme u' af det. Nu
Rosalje, hun bor paa Kvisten, hun gik paa Fabrek og ha'e sine go'e
ni Kroner om Ugen; nu gaar hun paa Daskens hver Da' i hvidt Skørt --
Undertøjet har hun ju'te en Stumpe a'. Og tjene vil de ju'te nu til
Dags!«

»Saa gør je'te maje Honnør for de Pi'er!« kom det i en usædvanlig
bestemt Tone fra den gamle Kone.

Manden siger med et Suk:

»Ja, hva' ska' der blive a'?«

»Saa gaar de nok og synger, men de er sgu' saa pirne alligevel og ka'
fløje i Flint over ingenting.«

»Hvis de nu taver?«

De sidde lidt tavse alle tre.

Madammen spørger haardt:

»Hvis de nu taver ... alle de Roljer. Hvodden gaar'et saa?«

»Hvordan det gaar? Jeg skal sige Dem, Madam, hvordan det gaar.«

Skomageren sætter sig til Rette. Hans Kone vender sig lyttende imod
ham.

»Hvis De nu vil følge me'. Ser De ... naar nu alle Mestrene,
Skoma'erne, Skræ'erne, Malerne, hvem De nu ka' nævne, si'er: nu
lukker vi og derme' Basta: Hva' saa?«

»Ja, hva' saa?«

»Saa ka' d'itte betale te Strikkekassen mer. Og saa spør' je': hva'
bli'r saa Enden paa det?«

Madammen ser betænksomt og alvorligt frem for sig, som anede hun sine
Kunders og sin egen Ruin.

Manden vedbliver forklarende:

»Fabrikanterne taver jo osse hver Da'. De ska' jo betale Renter af
saa maje. De bliver til sidst ke'e af det.«

»Saadan no'en sku' skamme sig og blive kiv i'et over den Slavs.«

»Naar de nu'tte mer ka' svare hver sit eller køve Malerier og Bøjer
og Støvler og Klæ'er. Og saa Huslejen. Saa bliver sgu Enden paa det,
at de lukker hele Menasjen. Og saa er det hele forbi. Ja, det er nu
min Forklaring, Madam. Det ka' osse vær', at de sætter det hele paa
Aktier, og saa smelter Pengene hen, og saa er der til sidst ingen,
der vil begynde paa noget. -- Det er nu min Mening!«

»Ja, trist er'et li'e godt!«

»Men saa er vi vel Gu'skelov dø'e. -- Ikke Mutter?«

Konen svarede mildt: »Ja, bare vi var vel i Jor'en.«

Manden sukkede og tændte sin Cigarstump igen ...

Hans Peter kommer styrtende imod dem.

Moderen raaber: »Se dig for Dreng, sikken du skøvler a'!«

Hans Peter snubler over sine alt for store Snørestøvler, men er
straks paa Benene igen og udbryder hæsblæsende:

»De ska' spelle nu. De kom me' den store Tromme!«

»Saa bliver vi og hører et Stykke ... Pas nu paa dine ny Bukser, Hans
Petter!«

»Ska' vi osse høre et Stykke, inden vi rokker hjema', Mutter?«

»Vi ska' vel snart hjem og i Seng, je' ska' jo ti'lig op.« Den gamle
Kone trak Sjalet tættere om sig.

»Vi ska' bare høre et Stykke ... Naar nu bare det bliver et af de
go'e gamle.«

Det giver et Ryk i den lille, magre Kone, da Orkestret i det samme
sætter i med de første Akkorder af Elverhøjsouverturen.

Værtshusholdermadammen forsøgte at fortsætte Samtalen, men de to
gamle svarede adspredt. De var altfor optagne af at høre efter
Musikken.

Da Slutningssangen klinger mod dem, puffer Skomageren fornøjet til
sin Kone og hvisker:

»Den kender du, Mutter!«

Hun nikker smilende.




DEN HØJE MAND.


Foraarsnattens lette Mørke hviler ved Foden af Egnens mange Bakkedrag
og mellem de kraftige Planter i Grøfternes fugtige Bund. Men
Højdernes runde, lave Rygge har bevaret et svagt Skær af Dagens gode
Lys, og Himlen er idel Klarhed; Skoven og de fjerne Hytter staa som
sorte Volde mod denne store, gullige Hvælving, hvor en enkelt bleg
Stjerne dukker frem af det bløde, slørede Lys.

Og Lyden af en Ugles hastige Vingeslag og af Draaberne, der siver fra
de brune Pløjemarker ned imod Engenes gulstrøede Grønne, og sagte,
rene Klange, som de travle Dage ikke kende og ikke kende Navn til, er
den hvilende Jords Aandedrag i det tidlige Foraars stille Nat. --

Men hvor Buskene tættede sig til Gærde om en Have, Urterne groede i
lige Rækker, og Tulipanerne stod i Bede ved Stuehusets Havedør, der
var andre Lyde: Trampen af Fødder, Latter og taktfast Violingniden.

Bonden giftede sin Datter bort med en flink Karl.

Medens Sognets Piger og Karle, de gifte Folk og Fremmede fra Byen
dansede og morede sig, gik Bonden omkring og sørgede for Mad og
Drikke, og hans gamle Hustru færdedes med gæstmilde Lader mellem
Køkken og Stuer.

Der var en Typograf fra Byen og nogle unge Bønder, der sad sammen og
drak. Da de blev højrøstede og røde i Hovederne, gik Bonden dem ofte
forbi med kold Mine uden at skænke i deres Glas. Derfor rejste de sig
og slentrede gennem den vognfyldte Gaard ud paa Vejen.

Det lette Mørke hvilede under de hvidblomstrede Tjørnebuske og blandt
de kraftige Planter i Grøfternes fugtige Bund. Men Skovene stod som
sorte Volde mod den lyse, store Himmel, og de krogede Hyldetræer
kastede vage Skygger paa Bøndergaardenes hvide Længer.

Landevejens lyse, brede Stribe svingede forbi den lille Landstation,
ud over Skinnerne og drejede om til Kroen.

Henimod den drev den glade Skare.

Typografen bandt et Lommetørklæde om Hovedet og sprang frem og
tilbage og gjorde Løjer, og de unge Bønder lo skraldende og
beundrende.

Stjernen blinkede. I de lave Enge sivede det sagte om Græssets
Rødder, Køerne laa og gumlede inde paa Marken, en Fugl flyttede sig
forskræmt, Rugen vuggede sagte sine groende Aks.

Typografen vrøvlede ustandseligt, og Bønderne gik fra Kærester og
Koner og de gæstfri Værtsfolk ned mod Kroen.

Sita's origin has been the subject of scholarly studies. Sita's birth and parentage have been depicted differently in different versions of Ramayana.[6]
Valmiki's Ramayana: In Valmiki's Ramayana and Kamban's Tamil epic Ramavataram, Sita is said to have discovered in a furrow in a ploughed field, and for that reason is regarded as a daughter of Bhūmi Devi[7] (the goddess earth), Sita Birthstar is Ashlesha Constellation . She was discovered, adopted and brought up by Janaka, king of Mithila, and his wife Sunayana.
Ramayana Manjari: In Ramayana Manjari (verses 344–366), North-western and Bengal recensions of Valmiki Ramayana, it has been described as on hearing a voice from the sky and then seeing Menaka, Janaka expresses his wish to obtain a child. And when he finds the child, he hears the same voice again telling him the infant is his spiritual child, born of Menaka.[6]
Janka's real daughter: In Ramopkhyana of the Mahabharata and also in Paumachariya of Vimala Suri, Sita has been depicted as Janaka's real daughter. According to Rev. Fr. C. Bulcke, this motif that Sita was the real daughter of Janaka, as described in Ramopkhyana Mahabharata was based on the authentic version of Valmiki Ramayana. Later the story of Sita miraculously appearing in furrow was inserted in Valmiki Ramayana.[6]
Reincarnation of Vedavati: Some versions of the Ramayana suggest that Sita was a reincarnation of Vedavati. Ravana tried to molest Vedavati and her chastity was sullied beyond Ravana's redemption when she was performing penance to become consort of Vishnu. Vedavati immolated herself on a pyre to escape Ravana lust, vowing to return in another age and be the cause of Ravana's destruction. She was duly reborn as Sita.[6]
Reincarnation of Manivati: According to Gunabhadra's Uttara Purana of the ninth century BCE, Ravana disturbs asceticism of Manivati, daughter of Amitavega of Alkapuri, and she pledges to take revenge on Ravana. Manivati is later reborn as the daughter of Ravana and Mandodari. But, astrologers predict ruin of Ravana because of this child. So, Ravana orders to kill the child. Manivati is placed in a casket and buried in the ground of Mithila where she is discovered by some of the farmers of the kingdom. Then Janka, king of that state adopts her.[6]
Ravana's daughter: In Sanghadasa's Jaina version of Ramayana of the 5th century BCE, Sita, entitled Vasudevahindi, is born as daughter of Ravana. According to this version, astrologers predict that first child of Vidyadhara Maya (Ravana's wife) will destroy his lineage. That's why Ravana abandons her and orders the infant to be buried in a distant land where she is later discovered and adopted by Janka.[6]


Da de vilde gaa ind ad dens Dør, rejste en høj, gammel Mand sig fra
Trappestenen og stillede sig i Vejen for dem. Han løftede sin Arm og
sagde med indtrængende, klingende Stemme:

»Holdt! Sløv ikke dit Blik og dys ikke din Sjæl. Vaag og bed. Se, i
denne Nat forgaar Jorden!«

»Det var som Satan!« brølede Typografen; »hvad i hede Helvede er Du
for en Obskuranter og Pietist! Gaa væk. Vi ere aandsfrie Mænd.«

Den høje Mand saa venligt iagttagende paa ham med sine alvorlige,
gode Øjne, men veg ikke fra Døren.

En af Skaren sagde udjævnende:

»Det er bare den gale Student fra Fattighuset.«

Straks snakkede de alle villigt i Munden paa hverandre for at oplyse
den lystige Typograf.

»Han skriver af for Skolelæreren og Præsten. Han er sgu Student.«

»Student -- jo vel!«

»Gu' er han Student. Men der var en Bog, der gjorde ham gal.«

»Den Bog hed vel nok Lisbeth fra Bakkegaarden.«

»Og den blev fæl til at rende efter Mandfolk og Brændevin.«

»Han er med og leder de blinde Musikanter, og saa kan han spille
Theater for os, naar han ikke er altfor tosset.«

»Gaa nu hellere hen i Gildesgaarden, Student. Gaa nu -- ellers faar
Du Prygl af blinde Søren.«

Den høje Mand bøjede sit Hovede saa dybt, at hans lange, hvide Haar
faldt ned over den hvælvede, furede Pande. Raadvild veg han til Side,
pint af Typografens Tilraab, men uafbrudt mumlende: »I denne Nat; jeg
har Brevskab derpaa. I denne Nat!«

Fra Skyggen af Rejsestalden saa han, at en Flok unge Piger og Koner
med hinanden under Armen kom ned ad Vejen og kaldte paa Karlene.
Dyrlægen, med Frakkekraven op om Ørene, Høkeren og et Par ældre
Bønder gik smaasnakkende bag ved dem.

Typografens unge Hustru stod længe og saa paa sin Mand, der lo
støjende af Raaheder og tumlede meningsløst omkring. Hans brede,
kloge Pande var rød, og hans gode Øjne saa stivt og vredt efter hende.

Hun syntes, at i dette Øjeblik veg hun ud af en hegnet, solfyldt
Have, hvor hun aldrig mere skulde komme. Men for sit ufødte Barns
Skyld gik hun hen og tog hans Haand og hviskede det Navn til ham, som
ingen uden hun og han kendte, det Navn, som de varede om, fordi det
var digtet i deres Kærligheds lifligste Time.

Men han skød til hende, som om hun var en paatrængende Skøge, og til
Bøndernes Morskab vrængede han Navnet efter.

Den høje Mand hørte det fra sin Plads i Rejsestaldens Skygge; og han
lukkede sine Øjne, fordi han ikke kunde taale at se hende tage sig
saa raadvild til Hjærtet. --

Saa snart han ikke mere saa Mændene og Kvinderne foran Kroen,
begyndte Dagens og Aftenens Syner at bore sig ned i hans Sinds Dybde
ad de eneste Veje, som førte gennem hans Bevidstheds Taager.

Drikkedjævlen har været i Gaarde. Ikke engang Præst og Skolelærer
kender ham, for han er venlig og ydmyg, indsmigrende og munter,
og derfor danse unge, uskyldige Piger ved hans Haand, medens han
uforstyrret sænker sin Gift i Sjælene, Guds rette Ejendomme. Tavse,
kloge Mænd blive aabenmundede og dumme. Unge Karle, som elske, blive
blinde og tror at se deres Hjærtes Udkaarne i hver Kvinde, og de give
deres helligste, bindende Ord til den første, der vil høre det. En
Mand, der Aaret før med Bøn og Graad har tigger om sin gamle Mors
Tilgivelse for en Forbrydelse mod Ære og Ret, som den smilende Djævel
havde forledt ham til, haaner i Aften Moderen, som advarende tager
om hans Haand, der griber efter Giften; -- og hele Sognet hører hans
vrede Ord.

En dygtig Bonde, som Dagene igennem slider og arbejder sammen med sin
Hustru for dagligt Brød, øder i Spil paa en Time, hvad der skulde
skaffe Midlet til deres syge, eneste Barns Frelse. --

Den høje Mand vaandede sig og aabnede sine Øjne, hvor Lidelsen
brændte. Hjælpeløs saa han ud over Marker og Enge; men da fornam
hans udækkede Sind, at det var en af Naturens hellige Timer, hvor
Mennesket, der gaar ind i dens Rige for at lytte til dens Toner,
lytter saa længe, at det hører sin egen inderste Sjæls sølvklingende
Musik.

En ung Kvinde gik alene ind over Markstien og saa paa de duggede
Blomster og op mod Stjernen og den lyse Himmel, medens hendes Elsker
sad med tungt Hovede og sløve Øjne og lo meningsløst. --

Men Høkeren smilede affabelt og sagde til Sogneraadsformanden:

»Man maa more sig, medens man er ung og fri.«

Sogneraadsformanden nikkede anerkendende og svarede vægtigt:

»Vist saa; blot med Maade.« --

I Skyggen ved Rejsestalden, hvor den høje Mand med skælvende,
hurtige Hænder gravede sig et Skjul mellem Halmknipperne, standsede
Typografens Hustru med Forvalteren; og hun lod sig kysse af hans
blussende Læber, og hun lod sit uskyldige Sind besudle af hans urene
Ord; i Fortvivlelse og Trods vilde, _vilde_ hun dynge mørke, fremmede
Begivenheder over det rædselsfulde, som skete før.

Da løftede den høje Mand Hovedet og saa op med et Blik, der straalede
af en fast og pludselig Beslutning; han knugede sine foldede Hænder
mod sin Pande og hviskede: »Ikke endnu Herre, ikke endnu!« Og han
løb, som den løber, der bærer sit Kæreste fra forfølgende Fjender.

Udenfor Kroen tømtes Flaskerne, indtil to Brødre yppede Kiv og
begyndte at slaas.

I det samme kom Stationsforstanderen. Hans guldsnorede Hat sad paa
Snur, hans Uniformsfrakke stod aaben, og han slog ud med Haanden og
raabte:

»Lad nu være med det Børnevrøvl, mine Herrer; her skal de se utrolige
Løjer.«

»Værs'artig, værs'artig mine Herschafter, ingenting for Voksne og det
halve for Børn, Folk uden Hoved gaar gratis ind!« raabte Typografen.

Stationsforstanderen stillede sig i Attitude med den ene Haand ind
paa Brystet og bukkede dybt. Man var Embedsmand, men havde dog
heldigvis Aand og Gemyt nok til at gaa ind paa en Spøg.

Derpaa fortalte han -- stadig afbrudt af Typografen, som var i
febrilsk Bevægelse for ikke at blive døsig.

»Jo, ser de, blinde Sørens Prygleknabe kom jo ind til mig paa
Kontoret med dette lange Telegram. Om jeg straks vilde afsende det?
Jo, det vilde jeg da nok, men det var dyrt. Ja, Mammon havde han
rigtignok ikke, men om en liden Stund skulde han ofre os sit Hjærte,
som hele Livet havde lidt af ulykkelig Kærlighed --«

»Ulykkelig Kærlighed!« Dundrende Latter.

»Ulykkelig Kærlighed, ja, til Gudsbilledet i Mennesket eller saadan
noget lignende højtravende Sludder.«

»Hans Hjærte i Betaling. Kan De give tilbage paa den Mønt,
Stationsforstander?«

Skraldende Latter.

»Havde det endda været hele Kroppen. Hva' Hr. Dyredoktor?«

Dyrlægen svarede tvært spøgende:

»Han fik sgutte første Klasses Stempel, det magre Spektakkel!«

Stationsforstanderen kom igen til Orde:

»Jeg sagde jo naturligvis ja og tog Papiret. Nu skal de høre.«

»Hold op at tviste. Silentium. Dixi. Hols Mauls, I Herrer!« tordnede
Typografen.

Stationsforstanderen læste ironisk-højtidelig:

»Telegram til Gud i Himlen. Jeg kender din Beslutning. Men Herre, lad
ikke Verden forgaa, medens her er en Djævel, der tager haardt om de
varme, bankende Hjærter og lammer de Hænder, som vil lindre Smerte og
Nød. Lad ikke Verden forgaa, medens den Djævel lærer Pigen Svig og
Løgn i samme Øjeblik, hun kysser sin trofaste Elskers Læber, lærer
hende Spot og Spe, naar hun gaar fra hans udstrakte Arme. Alle er mod
alle. Den, der længes, skal trampes. Den, der bløder, skal slaaes.
Den, der kryber om paa Marken for at finde et Hul, hvor ingen Lyd kan
naa ham, skal slæbes ind i Dansesale og Krostuer. Herre, lad ikke
Verden forgaa, medens alle er mod alle og vil hugge Klør og Tænder i
de pinende Saar. Herre, afvend din Vrede, tag mig som Sonoffer, jeg
giver dig mit Liv!«

»Og jeg giver en Omgang paa Kroen!« brølede Typografen til Bønderne,
der stod stille og halvvejs generte: »Træd indenfor, Hr. Banemand,
og lad os være fri for mere af det Kællingesludder.«

Men Toget var ved at komme, saa Stationsforstanderen maatte være
paa Perronen. Han satte Huen lige, knappede Frakken og gik med
hele Skaren ned for at inspicere Stationskarlen, der havde bragt
Signalerne i Orden og lagt Posttasken ud.

Ved Ventesalen brændte et Par Lygter; der stillede Skaren sig i Geled
for -- efter Typografens Kommando -- »at repræsentere Sognet for de
ærede Rejsende.«

Typografen begyndte at holde Tale, men tav leende, da han fik Øje paa
den høje Mand, der stod længst borte paa den lange, smalle Perron med
Armene strakt mod Himlen.

»Se, hvor Raden staar og kiger Stjerner; lad os faa mere Grin med
ham.«

En ældre Bonde svarede:

»Lad os nu undgaa Skandale her paa offentligt Sted; vi maa se at faa
ham hjem. Jeg giver Vogn; gaa Du hen og snak med ham, Typograf, det
maa Du forstaa.«

Typografen tog Lommetørklædet af Hovedet og svarede godmodigt:

»Javel, jeg snakker godt for ham.«

Han tog Bonden i Knaphullet. »Det er individuelt med saadanne
Fornemmelser, man maa bortforklare hans daarlige Humør, for ser
I, er han drukken, saa er der noget, der hedder en overordentlig
Modtagelighed, og --«

»Javel, men gaa nu bare. Nu piber Toget.«

Typografen gik hen mod den høje Mand, der havde kastet sig paa Knæ
med Hovedet bøjet tilbage og Hænderne foldede.

Toget brusede ind.

Den høje Mand væltede sig ud foran Lokomotivet og knustes.

Typografen fik ondt og ravede tilbage. Nede paa Perronen raabte de
og løb forvildet mellem hverandre. Dampen hvæsede ud. Passagererne
søgte at faa Kupédørene op. En ung Pige græd. En Handelsrejsende med
Spillekort i Haanden laa halvt ud af Vinduet og raabte kommanderende
paa Konduktør og Stationsforstander.

Da Lokomotivføreren sprang af Maskinen, saa' hans faste Blik, der var
blankt af Taarer, fuldt af Vrede og Fortvivlelse ud over den drukne,
raadløse Skare.




EN KÆRLIGHEDSHISTORIE.


Per i Kælderen kaldtes han af sine mange forskellige Bekendte, som
altid havde et Nik tilovers for ham, naar han med Hænderne i Lommen
stod paa Trappen, der førte ned til hans Beværtning.

Han skinnede af Properhed lige fra Kasketten, der sad langt ned over
den kuglerunde Isse, og til de tykke, hvide Uldstrømper, som stak i
blanke Træsko, saa snart han gik uden for sin Stuedør. Det gjorde han
mange Gange om Dagen for at staa og kige op og ned af sit etetages,
cementforsirede, røde Hus, der laa paa den anden Side af Gaden.

Til alt, hvad der paa nogen Maade stod i Forbindelse med denne hans
Ejendom, nærede Per en uangribelig Kærlighed.

Der var nu de storblomstrede Tapeter, Rosetterne i Lofterne og alle
de smaa Tremmepulterkamre med Hylder og Knagerækker, som han selv
havde gaaet og lempet i Stand; ja -- og saa var der jo Marie, en
lille Pige, hvis Forældre var Pers Lejere, hun var ogsaa Genstand for
de blidere Følelser, som Per virkelig var i Besiddelse af, -- om de
end ikke udtrykte sig særlig tydeligt i hans runde, røde Ansigt med
den gnavne, skæve Mund og de smaa Øjne, der ikke rigtig vilde være
ved, hvor iagttagende de var.

Pers og Maries Sympati var gensidig; den havde en frugtbar Jordbund
at gro i, for Per var -- fra den første Dag Maries Forældre flyttede
ind -- velvillig stemt imod dem; de havde saadan nydelige Gardiner og
Blomsterpotter. Paa den anden Side fandt Familien, at den halvgamle
Ungkarl var en meget behagelig Vært, der var saa langt fra at være
krakilsk, at han næsten var _for_ rar.

Ja, for Per _var_ rar, saa rar, at han ikke nænnede at sige imod,
naar hans Lejere bad ham om noget. Venligt og imødekommende sagde han
ja til ethvert Forlangende, -- men indvendig svor han paa, at saadan
et godt, grundmuret Hus sku' -- fan'eme -- ikke ha' nogen Slavs
Hundekunster med Panel eller saadan noget. --

Det hændte en Dag, at Per vandt Maries Hjærte helt ved at lette paa
Kasketten og raabe: »Goddag, lille Jomfru!« netop som Marie nød den
Ære at følges fra Skole med en ældre Kammerat, der altid pralede af,
at hendes Faders Kontorister tog Hatten af for hende.

Da Marie var kommen hjem, udsøgte hun sit bedste Glansbillede,
tilbragte en halv Times Tid med at pakke det ind, forsegle og skrive
rigtig flot uden paa: Per i Kælderen, Odense, Fyn, Danmark, Evropa;
derpaa gik hun ned og overrakte ham det.

Som Per plejede, naar han var forlegen, tog han Kasketten af og
arrangerede den graa Haardusk, der fra venstre Øre lagdes op over
Issen; men Opvartningsjomfruen, der var rapmundet og vant til at
finde sig til Rette i alle mulige Situationer, sagde:

»De maa da klinke med Frøkenen paa nærmere Bekendtskab, Hansen!«

»Sku' Barnet ha' Spærituosa! Ja, De er -- fan'eme -- hæ -- hva' De
er, Jomfru. -- La's af Ste' etter for -- la' mig se -- ja, tag Du
kuns for 25 Øre af de Toøres.«

Og Lars, den magre Kelneraspirant, rev Døren op, saa det lille røde
Gardin flagrede, og Klokken klingrede vildt; han tog Stentrappen op
til Gaden i et Spring, der var saa tjenstivrigt, at hans Knæ og Hage
kom i nærmeste Berøring. --

Efterhaanden blev Per i Kælderen og hans Territorium et Slags Fristed
for Marie, naar hun trængte til at hyldes efter at have været
tilsidesat i Barnekammeret.

Der regerede hendes femaarige Broder Kaj uindskrænket, protegeret af
Barnepigen, der havde været hans Amme, og som henfaldt i den dybeste
Melankoli og ubehageligste Fornærmelsestilstand, naar højere Magter
tillod sig at gribe ind i det hende underlagte Departements indre
Anliggender. Hun ofrede sig Dag og Nat for sin Kaj, vaagede over ham,
naar han havde lidt Mavepine, og tog ham med paa sin Ferietur ud
til hendes Svogers Gaard, hvor hendes Søn, der nu var Tjenestedreng,
havde tilbragt sin spæde Barndom. Blot Kaj forlangte det, nedlagde
Line øjeblikkelig sin Strikkestrømpe, agerede Hest, »kørte i Futtog«
eller klippede de vidunderligste Rækker af dansende Koner, hvis
stive Arme hængte sammen; -- men Marie, der efter Lines Mening
favoriseredes i Dagligstuen, kunde forgæves tigge hende i Timevis om
den Slags Gunstbevisninger.

Nej -- saa blev Marie rigtignok anderledes behandlet hos Per i
Kælderen!

Var der Gæster, sendte han hende med synlig Overvindelse bort igen,
men ellers blev hun modtaget som en Prinsesse.

»Jomfru, ind og tag Tøjet og Gamasserne af vores Frøken! La's, af
Ste' me' Dig etter Botterdejger.«

Marie følte sig fuldstændig hjemme i den hyggelige Kælderstue; hun
fandt det saa interessant, at de brede, med Blomsterpotter smykkede
Vinduer sad højt oppe, og at der stod firkantede, voksdugsbeklædte
Borde omkring paa det sandstrøede Gulv.

Det var saa morsomt, at det var netop det Bøgebrænde, som Per under
hendes Tilsyn havde kløvet, der blussede og buldrede i den store,
gammeldags Kakkelovn.

Og megen Skæmt havde Per og Barnet for, især da »Gækkeneljerne«
begyndte at komme.

Per forsøgte paa alle mulige underfundige Maader at narre Marie en
Blomst i Hænde; men hun var, som han sagde, »den mest dørkdrevneste
Ra', der ku' gaa paa et Par Ba'ben!«

Dog -- en Dag, da Marie tog sin traditionelle »Snitte«, gik den midt
over, og inde i den laa den famøse Blomst.

Da lo Per, saa hans svære Mave rystede, og Marie lo, Jomfruen
formelig hvinede, og Lars, der fra Bagstuen spændt havde luret
paa, hvorledes Komplottet skulde falde ud, kom styrtende med sit
bevægelige Ansigt trukket ud til de mest forekommende Smil.

-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --

Skønt Per og Line ikke var ganske enige i Valget af deres Favoritter,
opstod der dog mellem dem et Slags nærmere Bekendtskab og en vis
hemmelighedsfuld Samfølelse i Anledning af Børnene.

Det begyndte med, at Line en Dag, som hun stor og tyk trampede forbi
Kælderhalsen, hvor Per stod og betragtede sin Ejendom, spurgte:

»Hun er da vel skikkelig, naar hun er nere hos dem, Per Hansen?«

Rigtignok besvarede Per kun denne Antydning af Tvivl om Maries
Ufejlbarlighed med nogle smaa foragtelige Grynt, men ikke desto
mindre blev det til en lille Passiar; den efterfulgtes af adskillige
flere, ja endogsaa af en Indbydelse paa »Sukkela'e« nede i Kælderen,
hvad Line dog ikke mente at kunne modtage.

Men i hendes Reflexioner kom denne Indbydelse til at spille en vis
Rolle; der var noget »rijælt« ved saadan et Tilbud af Traktement.
Hendes Sympati for den belevne Per, som sad der alene med Bedriften,
voksede. --

Da Storken gik i Enge, og Gøgen kukkede i Skoven, og Tiden for Lines,
Kajs og Maries aarlige Landtur indtraf, udvirkede Line hos sit
Herskab, at Per maatte inviteres med. --

Og Per tog med i lys Sommerfrakke og med sin bedagede Følge-Lig-Hat,
-- men i dybeste Hemmelighed, for Prangerne havde saadan »none
visnæsede Kæfter.«

Da det lille Selskab var kommet ud af Toget og travede hen ad
Landevejen til Lines Svogers Gaard, erklærede Marie, at det var den
bedste Tur, de endnu havde havt, og det var, fordi Per var med!

Det satte ham straks i godt Humør. Endnu bedre blev det, da de efter
Kaffen, hvortil han trakterede med umaadelige Masser af Wienerbrød,
gik ud og saa paa Besætningen.

Per var bondefødt, og her i den græsgroede Gaard mellem de lave,
hyggende Længer levede hans Ungdomsfølelser delvist op igen.

Han tog Hatten af, rystede paa Hovedet, lo lidt, vendte sig saa til
Line, -- Svogeren havde demonstrativt ladet dem være ene, -- og sagde
med et Smil og et Suk, der saa udmærket forenedes om hans gnavne Mund:

»Ja, dengang var man ret en lieber Gut!«

Line, der ogsaa paa en Maade var betaget, svarede ud af _sin_
Tankegang:

»Ja, ordentlig, det er her. De sku' se Spisekammerhylderne. -- Vores
Familie har nu alleti'er været te' aa sli'e. Je' kom u' at tjene, da
je' var ti Aar, Per Hansen!«

Per Hansen holdt Begravelseshatten i Haanden og ordnede febrilsk ved
Haardusken. Line fortsatte i en bestemt Tone:

»Vi har nu været store og stærke, mine Foræl're, de var nu osse
saadan te' aa sli'e. Har di'tte givet vos andet i Arvepart, saa har
de givet vos Løst te' Arbe'!«

»Ja, det er sgu Kapital, der ka' flaske sig!« udbrød Per.

»Vi var jo manne Børn, men de er kommen godt deran allesammen, se nu
min Søster her, og én blev sgu Jordemor. -- Det er jo kuns egentlig
mig, der er saadan lidt strandet; men saa længe je' ka' arbe', saa
har je' det godt; det er dog li'egodt det, der holder Humøret oppe.«

Per stod tavs og betragtede opmærksomt Vandtruget. Saa satte han
Hatten paa, slog Hænderne sammen, sparkede lidt ud med det ene Ben og
sagde letsindigt og flot:

»Dø' og Kritte, sikken en Vær'shusholdermadam, der ku' hav' bleven a'
Dem, Line!«

»La' De nu bare vær', Per Hansen, ska' je' te' aa spekkelere, bliver
je' bare krakilsk aa halvtovlig.«

»Gu' gør De ikke nikke nej! De er soli' -- fan'eme -- det har jeg
alti'er sagt. -- -- Men det ka' være maje rigtig, man ska'te si'e
mer, end som man ka' staa ve'; det er der Rasong i.«

Og saa gik Per ind i Kostalden. --

Aftenen kom, og Per, Line og Børnene begav sig efter et solidt
Maaltid paa Vej til Stationen.

Line bar sin Kaj paa Ryggen et langt Stykke; Marie travede af Sted
ved Pers Haand.

Ingen af dem talte.

Alle Lydene fra Gaardene og Markerne dæmpedes mere og mere, indtil
de smeltede sammen med Kvækket af Frøerne i de gyldentblanke Kær,
den svage Surren i Telegrafstængerne, et lille Vandløbs vedholdende,
næsten uhørlige Rislen, et enkelt Pip af en Fugl -- til en sagte,
stilfærdig Musik, der -- Per og Line ubevidst -- lokkede deres træge
Tanker til uvant Svirren og satte deres jævne Følelser i en særegen
Bevægelse. --

Ved en Sidevej, der førte ned til en lille Skov, satte de sig paa
Gærdet.

Kaj blev anbragt paa Lines Sjal, og han og Marie lavede i Tavshed
Livbaand og Kranse af Blade, som de heftede sammen med smaa Pinde.

Pers Mund var usædvanlig skæv, som han sad der og saa' ud i
Solnedgangens Guld og Ild; tilsidst tog han sig helt blændet over
Øjnene. Gav sig saa til at snitte Pinde til Børnene.

Hen ad den haarde Vej lød taktfaste Trin og Hestetrampen.

En ung Karl kom hjem fra Marken med et Par kraftige Arbejdsheste.

»Go' Avten!« hilste han muntert og tog Piben ud af Munden.

Per, der følte sit Ansvar, benyttede Lejligheden til for yderligere
Sikkerheds Skyld at spørge, om han vidste, hvor længe der var, indtil
Toget gik.

»Prr, ka' I sto'!« sagde Karlen og standsede Hestene, tog sit Uhr
frem, lukkede Celluloidkassen op og svarede:

»Stationen er jævne herve', bliv Du kuns sittende me' Mutter og det
unge Danmark en hal' Time te'. I er kanske fra O'ense?«

»Ja, det er vi da.«

Hestene begyndte at gaa. »Ja, Farvel,« hilste Karlen og gik raskt
videre.

Per henfaldt atter i Grublerier.

Efter en lang Tavshed udbrød han melankolsk og stemningsbetaget:

»Saadan gamle Mandfolk, naar vi bliver gamle, saa duer vi sgu'te te'
andet end te' og smi'e paa Møtningen!«

Line svarede:

»Nej, -- I ka' ju'tte saadan rederere jer selv; er det nu nove at
sitte der me' bart Ho'e og forkøle Dem, Per Hansen?«

Og Line rakte ham den høje.

Denne kvindelige Omhu var mere end Per i dette Øjeblik kunde staa
for; den vakte den Længsel efter noget -- ud over Skænkepigens
Stoppen hans Strømper og Reden hans Seng, -- som ikke var helt
udslukt hos den gamle Ungkarl.

Han rømmede sig, tog utallige Gange Hatten af Hovedet og ordnede
sin eneste Haarlok, gned sin røde Kind heftigt, sukkede og slog sig
arrigt over Knæene. Men pludselig sagde han energisk til sig selv:
»Nu holder Du Kæft, Per Hansen, ellers saa gaar den -- fan'eme --
aff!« --

Stemningen var ligesom sunken et Par Grader.

Marie sad og saa tankefuld fra Per til Line.

Kaj forlangte nedladende at føres afsides.

Line sprang ilsomt op.

Da hun kom tilbage, sagde hun:

»Hva' si'er Perpendiklen, Per Hansen? Vi ska' vel af Ste'?«

»Ja, vi maa vel -- for Børnenes Skyld. Aark, hvis det nu var vores,
og vi sku' hjem te' saadan et pænt, grundmuret Hus med Veranda og
Glaskugle midt paa Græsplænen. Aark -- fan'eme,« sukkede Per dybt.

Men Line sagde bestemt:

»Nu ska' De la' vær' og skave Dem, Per Hansen, vil De mig no'et
rijælt, eller vil D'itte? Jeg er for gammel te' at la' mig ta' ve'
Næsen. Ja, jeg er!«

Per saa forbløffet paa hende og gned sig raadvild paa Issen. Men da
sagde Marie:

»Det er ligesom, vi var Far og Mor og Børn! Ikke Kaj. Hvad?«

»Jo,« svarede Kaj afgørende og stak for første Gang frivilligt sin
Haand i Pers.

»Fan'eme!« udbrød han, »jeg givter Dem, Line!«

»Herregu' Per, det ska' Du'te komme te' at fortry'e,« svarede Line og
viskede sig over Øjnene. -- --

Da Per den Aften skulde skilles fra sine Rejsefæller, trak han Line
afsides, gav hende det første Smækkys, slog med Haanden hen efter
Marie og sagde: »Hun er et af de mest klovviseste Børn, _jeg_ har
set. Bare Vorherre ikke ta'er hende.«

Let krænket saa Line efter Kaj og svarede: »Han er nu mer' saadan me'
at tænke indvendig.«

»Ja, der ska' no'en te' det værste, -- Madam Hansen,« lo Per; Line lo
med og gik saa efter Børnene.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Hyld og Humle, by Sophie Breum

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HYLD OG HUMLE ***

***** This file should be named 43290-8.txt or 43290-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/3/2/9/43290/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from scanned
images of public domain material from the Google Print
project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of Guds Fred, by Peter Nansen

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Guds Fred

Author: Peter Nansen

Release Date: July 24, 2013 [EBook #43295]

Language: Danish


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GUDS FRED ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from scanned
images of public domain material from the Google Print
project.)





Afskriverens bemærkninger: Åbenlyse trykfejl er rettet i denne
e-bog, men forfatterens stavning er for øvrigt bevaret.
_Understreg_ er brugt til at gengive kursiveret tekst.




                            PETER NANSEN

                              GUDS FRED

                             ANDET OPLAG

                             KJØBENHAVN

                       P. G. PHILIPSENS FORLAG

            Trykt hos J. Jørgensen & Co. (M. A. Hannover)

                                1895




  En autoriseret tysk Udgave af _Guds Fred_ udkommer,
  samtidig med den danske Udgave, hos _S. Fischer_
  i Berlin.

  Fjerde Tusend.




I.


                                                       _5. Juni._

Saa skal jeg da bort fra Hovedstaden. I femten Aar holdt den mig
fast, den listige Skøge, bildte mig ind, at jeg ikke kunde undvære
dens giftigt parfumerede Luft, dens støjende Lader, dens hidsende
Anspændthed, dens forfinede Magelighed. Jeg sad i et Spind af tusind
Fangetraade, jeg troede, den havde fanget mig for Tid og Evighed.
Jeg troede vel ogsaa saa smaat, at den ikke kunde undvære mig. Var
jeg ikke i Aarenes Løb bleven et fast Led i det store Maskineri?
Ansaas af Alle for at høre med. Var selvskreven Deltager i Byens
broget vekslende Liv, snart festklædt, snart sørgeklædt; gav min
Stemme med i de afgørende Ordskifter, blev spurgt og søgt, var
Raadgiver og Hjælper, en paalidelig Ven, en Fjende, der maatte
regnes med.

Hvor træt jeg ofte har været. Udslidt som en gammel Droskehest, der
maa drives afsted med Piskeslag og som gærne lagde sig plat ned paa
Stenbroen og blev liggende, til Døden og Hvilen kom.

Dødsenstræt er jeg, af Fornøjelser og Arbejde, af altid at være til
Rede, tage Parti, forsvare og angribe; dødsenstræt og i mit Hjærte
saa ligegyldig, mens ingen Slaphed tør røbes i Ord og Væsen.

Allermest træt af den evige Kamp for Penge. Penge, der maatte
og skulde skaffes, slides til Veje, laanes frem, forrentes,
tilbagebetales, altid flere, altid besværligere -- en stedse
voksende Lavine, mere og mere truende, tungere for hver Time at
stemme Ryg imod, hæmmende Arbejdsevnen om Dagen, skræmmende Søvnen
som en Mare.

Hvorfor undre sig over den mer eller mindre aabenbare Støtte,
Socialismen i stigende Grad vinder hos Folk, der ikke hører til
de legemlige Arbejdere? Forklaringen ligger lige for Haanden. Hvad
har de ni af ti blandt os, der rangerer i de øvre Klasser, at tabe
ved en Samfundsomvæltning, en Forandring af de herskende økonomiske
Regler og Love? Vi er, mindst de ni af ti, Proletarer, der kæmper
en haabløs Kamp for at faa de Indtægter, Samfundet under os, til at
holde Maal med de Udgifter, det samme Samfund kræver af os, om vi
ikke vil sættes udenfor Numer. Paa faa Undtagelser nær lever vi alle
over Evne, Embedsmænd og Kunstnere, Videnskabsmænd og Handlende,
Præster, Skuespillere, Oberster, Journalister, Borgmestre og
Poeter. Hvad tabte vi vel, om pludselig den store Eksplosion kom,
Eksplosionen, som sprængte Samfundet løs af alle Fuger og lavede
Fidibusser af Gældsbreve, Veksler og Forskrivninger? _De_ har det
maaske endda forholdsvis bedst, som lever fra Haanden i Munden.
Deres Fordringer til Livet er smaa og der stilles ingen Fordringer
til dem. Hellerikke er det dem, der satte Gang i den Bevægelse, som
fører til Omvæltningen. Det er Mænd fra vor Midte, der lærte dem at
blive Socialister, det er Fortvivlelsen i de højere Klasser, der har
avlet Kravene nede fra.

-- -- Forleden brød jeg overtvært. Overgav mit Bo til en velsindet
Sagfører, ordnede mig med en Forlægger, der nærede en venlig Tillid
til mine Evner og erklærede sig villig til at udbetale mig for et
Aar eller to en beskeden maanedlig Understøttelse, har nu pakket min
Kuffert og indskiber mig i Eftermiddag -- uden Farvel til Nogen --
for at drage til den gamle Provinsby, hvor jeg har levet min første
Barndom; som jeg ikke i tyve Aar har set, men som jeg stadig, naar
Trætheden kom op i mig, har længtes tilbage til.

Jeg har ikke vaklet. I samme Nu, mit Opbrud fra Hovedstaden
besluttedes, i samme Nu vidste jeg, hvor jeg vilde hen. Den gamle By
kalder mig som en Moder, der trofast har siddet og ventet paa sit
vidt omstrejfende Barn. I den gamle By er der intet, som kan minde
mig om det, jeg vil glemme og bort fra. Den og jeg kender hinanden
kun fra de gode Aar, da den var det skønneste og dejligste, jeg
vidste, Genstanden for min Stolthed og Beundring, og da jeg var et
af dens mest forkælede Børn. Den kalder paa mig som en Moder. Thi
dér ligger min Moder begravet. Den rummer al den Moderkærlighed, jeg
i hine Dage nød mere end nogen anden og som jeg mistede saa tidligt.
Hvor i Verden tage hen uden netop til den gamle By? Jeg søger den jo
for at blive Barn igen.




II.


                                                        _Ombord._

Ikke har jeg sovet og ikke vaaget paa Overfarten. Jeg sidder i den
lune lyse Sommernat paa Dækket og lader drømmende Tankerne følge
den gyldne Kølvandsstribe, vugget blidt til Ro af Maskinens tunge
regelmæssige Slag og de hoppende Smaabølgers klukkende Skvulp mod
Skibet.

Tankerne følger Striben tilbage -- til det Liv, den Verden, hvor
jeg nys færdedes. Saa underlig langt jeg allerede føler mig fra det
altsammen, saa fremmed og overlegen overfor det. Hvor ligegyldigt,
tomt og intetsigende det nu synes mig. Og _det_ har jeg ofret femten
af mine bedste Aar. Ingen har været ivrigere end jeg, ingen mere
fanatisk troende. Pur ung meldte jeg mig til mit Partis Fane,
sloges bravt og blindt i de Meniges Rækker, forfremmedes og naaede
vel noget nær de Udmærkelser, min Ærgærrighed kunde begære. Midt i
Kampbulderet har jeg været, har hadet og tilbedt, aldrig svigtet
min Fane-Ed, aldrig følt mig fristet til det, har vundet Venner og
Fjender, gjort Godt og Ondt efter Evne og bedste Skøn.

Og hvad er saa Resultatet blevet? Lykke for mig? Lykke for nogen
Anden? Næppe det sidste; det første afgjort ikke. Naar jeg nu
godvilligt opgiver min tilkæmpede Stilling -- den, vistnok Mange
misunder mig som atraaværdig --, er det i en inderlig Følelse af
dens haabløse Uudholdelighed.

Hvad i Herrens Navn slaas man for? Hvorfor forfølger man hinanden,
mistænker og mishandler hinanden, altid væbnet til Tænderne, altid
parat til at hugge løs? Maaske er der, langt ude i det Fjærne,
et Maal at naa. En højere Retfærdighed, en bedre Fordeling af
Tilværelsens Goder. Maaske oplever vore Børnebørn en ny social
Omvæltning. Men forøvrigt: vil Menneskene føle sig lykkeligere, om
Maalet virkelig naaes, eller vil de ikke blot skynde sig, med Uro i
Hjærterne, i unøjsom Higen, at kæmpe og hade sig frem mod nye Maal?
Sikkert. Nej, det er en tom Indbildning, at Lykken vindes gennem
Kamp. Kun i Fred, Fred med sig selv og Verden, findes Lykken.

At tænke sig, at de stadig slaas derinde. Endnu har den store
By ikke lagt sig til Hvile, endnu summer Ondskaben og Vreden i
elektrisk Belysning gennem Gaderne, stimer sammen paa Kaféerne,
drikker sig ør og sløv, vaagner saa imorgen, efter en angstfuld
Søvn, i hede Hjærner og bitre Hjærter. At de gider! At de ikke
alle en dejlig Sommermorgenstund springer op med den Beslutning,
at nu vil de ikke længer! Smider Vaabnene fra sig, svaler den hede
Hjærne i den friske Morgen, fylder det bitre Hjærte med Naturens
søde Vellyst, renser sig ud for al Ondskab og alt Had, slutter
Fred over hele Linjen paa det simple, letfattelige Grundlag: Vi
er Mennesker alle, vi vil hinanden intet Ondt. Og fuldbyrder,
uden Blodsudgydelse, den Revolution, som gør enhver ny Revolution
overflødig.

-- -- Saadan sidder jeg og drømmer, mens Skibet den skønne Juninat
bærer mig over den stille Sø til min gamle By. Og som var det et
Billed, skabt af min Drøm, ser jeg i Solopgangen, just som vi har
passeret Fjordens Indløb, en ung Kvinde staa ved min Side, stor og
stolt, med et Ansigt, der lyser af mild Fred. Som et Syn kom hun,
som et Syn forsvandt hun. Men var hun et Varselbud, jeg modtager det
med Tak. Et Varsel om, at jeg er styret den rette Kurs for at finde
Freden.




III.


                                    _Vejrbakken, 6. Juni, Aften._

Vi ankom i den aarle Morgenstund. Bagagen lod jeg foreløbig staa
ombord -- jeg vidste endnu ikke, hvor jeg vilde bo. Og jeg drev
op gennem den slumrende By. Straks var jeg lidt vildsom til
Mode. Den Gade, jeg gik i, havde et Navn, jeg ikke mindedes, og
mange nye Huse med flove glatte Allemands-Façader og hjærteløse
Spejlglas-Butiksruder.

Men da jeg kom ud paa Torvet, kendte jeg min gamle By.

Jeg satte mig paa den fritstaaende Stentrappe foran det Hus, hvor
jeg som Barn havde boet; jeg lukkede Øjnene over det hastigt
gensete Billede, og saa livagtigt, som havde jeg nys forladt
det, opstod Torvet i min Erindring, saadant som det var i mine
Barndomsdage.

For Enden af Torvet løber Østeraa. Den er ikke overdækket --
som nu --, den flyder aaben gennem Byen, med Broer over og med
knudrede løvrige Træer paa begge Sider. Og den er fuld af Baade og
smaa Skuder, hvor der sælges Fisk og Jydepotter og Træsko og, om
Efteraaret, Frugt. Saa dufter hele Torvet, ja Gaderne udenom med, af
krydrede Bergamotter og Gravensteners Rosen-Em.

Den anden Ende af Torvet beherskes af det gulstrøgne Kongehus med
den takkede Gavl. Her er det, at Byens gamle Storkefædre holder
Forsamling Sommereftermiddage. De staar én paa hver af Gavlens
Afsatser, øverst oppe Præsidenten, der aabner Mødet med en høj
Knebren. Derefter knebrer de paa Rad, alle de ærværdige Storke, og
de, der lytter til, staar undertiden paa ét Ben af lutter Iver. Men
det hænder, at Raadsforsamlingen opløses i almindeligt Klammeri,
mens alle Storkene basker med Vingerne og knebrer forbitret i Munden
paa hinanden. Ogsaa hænder det, at en nidkær Storkemadam eller en
næsvis Storkepode forsøger at trænge sig ind i Forsamlingen og
bliver sat paa Porten under drøje Knubs, saa Fjerene ryger om den.

Det gamle Kongehus, hvilken Sorg den Dag det dømmes til Døden af et
pietetsløst Borgervels Krav paa en ny tidssvarende Bankbygning. De
skændige Rænker, de giftige Løgne, der føres i Marken for at fælde
det.

Det insinueres, at alle de historiske Overleveringer, som giver
Kongehuset Ry og Glans gennem Aarhundreder, er tyvstjaalen Pynt.
Det paastaas ydermere, at Huset er saa medtaget af Ælde, at det
næppe kan holde sig oprejst og at det er en stadig truende Fare for
de omliggende Bygninger. En rasende Kamp føres i Byraad og i den
stedlige Presse mellem Ideens Talsmand -- Latinskolens Historielærer
-- og Borgervellets Materialister. Men disse sidste sejrer, efterat
et Velfærdsudvalg af bankforhippede Haandværkere har givet
sagkyndigt Skøn for Kongehusets Affældighed. Og Nedbrydningen
begynder. Vi Børn, hvis fædrelandske Fantasi er vokset op i Skyggen
af det gamle Hus, følger med forbitret Sorg hvert Slag af Hakken,
og vi nyder en smerteblandet Triumf, da Haandværkerne midt under
Arbejdet maa erklære sig magtesløse og tage Krudtet til Hjælp for
at sprænge Kongehusets favntykke Mure. Saa falder omsider den gamle
Kæmpe, men ej for Menneskehaand. Døende spotter den sine Voldsmænd.

Midt paa Torvet ligger det røde Raadhus med Byens Vaaben i Guld og
Farver over den svære brune Egetræsdør. Om Raadhuset samler sig
alle Barnestue-Historiernes Uhygge. Foran det stod i gamle Dage
Gabestokken og Pælen, hvortil Forbryderne bandtes, naar de offenligt
piskedes. Her udsonede bl. a. de berygtede Røvere fra de store Skove
Nord for Fjorden Begyndelsen af deres Straf, da de langt om længe,
efter talløse Skændselsgærninger, fangedes af Militæret og Omegnens
Bønder. Banden bestod af en gammel Kælling, hendes syv ryggesløse
Sønner og en vidunderskøn ung Pige, Kæreste til den ældste af
Brødrene, Erik Krumfinger. Plyndring, Voldtægt og Ildebrand var de
mindste af deres Forbrydelser. Ogsaa adskillige Mord havde de paa
deres Samvittighed og Grusomheder af den skrækkeligste Art. Saaledes
-- fortalte ialfald min Barnepige -- morede de sig med at binde
smaa Børn til gloende Ovne, naar de forlod en Bondegaard efterat
have plyndret den og myrdet de voksne Beboere. Det var en Fest for
hele Byen og Omegnen, da de, nøgne til Bæltestedet, piskedes foran
Raadhuset og Morgenen efter førtes til Galgebakken og henrettedes.
Kun Erik Krumfingers Kæreste vakte en vis Medlidenhed. Hun var saa
dejlig af Skikkelse og Aasyn, hun var saa ung og hun jamrede sig saa
bitterligt, da hun blev pisket. Men om Skaansel kunde der ikke være
Tale. Hun havde været den allergrummeste til at stege de smaa Børn.

Rundt om Torvet ligger saa alle de gamle Købmands- og
Beværtningsgaarde, hvor Bønderne tager ind Torvedagene og hvor der
er den herligste Tumleplads for Børnenes Lege. Bindingværks-Gaarde,
der er et sandt Vildnis af Svalegange med tørrede Sild paa udspændte
Snore, af vaklende Trapper og møre Ud- og Tilbygninger, der raver
mellem hinanden som fulde Mænd. Her paa Lofterne i de store
Korndynger leges der Skjul, og om Lørdagen sidder jeg bag Disken i
den holstenske Madams Værtshuskælder og skænker hvidt Øl og Dram
for Bønderne og min Ven Droskekusken, som bor i et Hul bag Stalden
i Porten og dér, i en altid frisk Atmosfære af Hestegødning, med
et Spritkogeapparat, en Rugbrødshumpel, en Krukke Svinefedt og en
Billing Kommensost fører den lykkeligste Ungkarle-Husholdning, jeg
kan tænke mig. Men naar Stemningen bliver høj i den lave Kælder,
morer man sig med at give den aldrende Droskehest Brød, dyppet
i Brændevin, og som en vild Araber farer Øget rundt om Torvet,
bredende Skræk og Forfærdelse mellem Bønderkonerne, der sidder
med udbredte Skørter foran Raadhustrappen og i landlig Ugenérthed
besørger deres Privatanliggender.

-- -- -- Jeg aabner Øjnene og ser ud over det sollyse Torv.
Raadhuset ligger der endnu, de gamle Gaarde ogsaa, jeg ser
Værtshuskælderens smaa grønne Ruder, jeg øjner en Stump af Aaen,
der bugter sig mellem hældende Huse og over hvis lemlæstede Poesi
et enkelt Syrentræ i en tilstødende Have breder et ungt blomstrende
Smil -- -- jeg kender min gamle By og jeg rejser mig, let og glad i
Sindet, med en dirrende Lykkefornemmelse af at være hjemme.

Jeg er hjemme, og jeg vil til min Moders Grav.

       *       *       *       *       *

Endnu er Byen ikke vaagnet. Mens jeg vandrer gennem dens tomme
Gader, fornemmer jeg det, som om jeg er kommen og har overrasket
den, og jeg sender vækkende Gensynshilsener til alle de kendte Ting,
jeg møder. Herregud, her hænger det endnu nedad Kirketaarnet, det
tykke Tov, som var den gamle Bys ukunstlede Brandsignal-Apparat.
Den, der opdagede en Brand, havde at trække i Tovet, saa Klokken
i Taarnet klemtede. Mellem os Børn hed det sig, at den Lykkelige,
der saaledes meldte en Brand, fik udbetalt en blank Rigsdaler. Hvor
flittigt -- men forgæves -- spejdede jeg ikke paa hver Spadseretur
efter at se Luerne slaa ud af et Hus. Jeg vandt aldrig Daleren.
Monstro det gamle Tov endnu gør Tjeneste, eller hænger det mon blot
som en forglemt Levning fra svundne Dage?

Jeg standser og ser ned ad en skraanende Side-Gade. I det
fremspringende Hjørne-Hus dernede var det jo, vi boede i Krigens
Aar. Jeg var ikke mere end et Par Aar den Gang, og dog præntede
hine Dages Begivenheder uudslettelige Indtryk i min Sjæl. Den
tyske Indkvartering -- Soldaterne, der skændtes med Moder om den
danske Mad, og den gemytlige hvidskæggede Major Brumbasse, der
forelskede sig i os Børn, men som jeg ikke vilde lade kysse mig,
fordi han var en Tysker. Allermest dog disse Billeder: Min Moder
og mine halvvoksne Søstre samt et Par andre af Byens Smaapiger
sidder og piller Charpi. Pludselig lyder der Hestetramp i Gaden,
jeg skynder mig til Vinduet, men i det samme gaar Døren til Faders
Studereværelse op, og med et kraftigt Ryk rives jeg bort fra
Vinduet. »Rul Gardinerne ned, Ingen maa se ud,« -- siger Fader, bleg
og bevæget. »Tyskerne kommer!« En uhyggesvanger Stilhed hersker i
den mørke Stue, og bange kryber jeg sammen i Moders Skørter, mens
den klaprende Larm af mange Heste kommer nærmere. Saa standser
Støjen lige nedenfor vore Vinduer, vi hører kun nogle hastige høje
Ord, der lyder som Skældsord, en Klynken, nye Eder, Forbandelser,
Raslen af Sabler, urolig Stampen af Heste og, tilsidst, et
angstfuldt Skrig paa Dansk. Sit eget Forbud til Trods iler Fader
til Vinduet, Moder og vi Børn bag ham, og fra en Stol ser jeg en
Mand, i hvem jeg kender vor Skomager, blive slæbt af en Officer i
skinnende hvid Kappe henad Stenbroen, langs den stejlende Hest. Og
jeg ser Gaden fuld af fint uniformerede Ryttere, der nu alle igen
sætter sig i Bevægelse, efter Officeren, der, med Skomageren som
tvungen Vejviser, fører an ned mod Fjorden, over hvilken de danske
Soldater er flygtede.

Og saa Billedet af de saarede danske Soldater, der køres gennem
Gaderne, efter den ulykkelige Træfning ved Bakkerne Vest for Byen.
Saa sikkert var Sejren ventet, thi for en Gangs Skyld var Danskerne
de fleste. Desværre havde Obersten, der førte vor Afdeling, ogsaa
været for tillidsfuld. I Stormløb lod han sine Folk tage Terrænet
ned ad Bakkerne, ved hvis Fod Tyskerne ventede i Ly bag Grøftehegn.
Og fra den dækkede Stilling strakte Tyskernes Geværkugler de
fremstormende Danskere til Jorden som værgeløst Vildt. Herom
havde vi Børn hørt, ogsaa om Oberstens Fortvivlelse -- han var
indkvarteret hos en Embedsmandsfamilje, som stod os nær, og det var
fortalt Fader, hvordan Obersten, der om Morgenen red sejrssikker ud
for at oplede Tyskerne, sent om Aftenen var vendt tilbage og havde
lukket sig inde paa sine Værelser, uden at ville spise og uden at
ville tale med Nogen. Nu, den næste Morgen, kom de Saaredes Træn.
Langsomt og tungt, som et Ligtog, ruller Vognene gennem Gaden, og
paa spredte Halmneg hviler de Saarede. Nogle har Bind om Hovedet,
andre om Arme eller Ben. Bindene er plettede af Blod og Ansigterne
er hvidere end Bindene. Ikke en af de Saarede ser til Vinduerne,
alle stirrer de frem for sig med udslukte, haabløse Blikke.
Jeg havde vel næppe nogen saadan Tanke den Gang: det har siden
staaet for mig, som om disse saarede danske Soldater mindre vakte
Medlidenhed ved deres legemlige Smerter end ved den Fortvivlelse
-- ja, Skamfølelse -- over Nederlaget, der stod at læse i deres
forpinte Ansigter.

       *       *       *       *       *

-- -- Jeg gaar uden at tænke paa den Vej, jeg følger. Det er tyve
Aar siden, jeg traadte disse Gader, deres Navne har jeg i tyve Aar
ikke haft i mine Tanker: som ved en usynlig Haand, uden Eftertanke,
uden Famlen, føres jeg nøjagtigt derhen, jeg vil. Jeg er i mit
Barndomshjem, jeg er i min Faders Hus; min Fod farer ikke vild paa
den hjemlige Grund.

Saa staar jeg, just som Hanen galer tredie Gang sin Morgenhilsen
over Byen, i den lille Gade, som leder ned til Kirkegaarden. De
lave straatækte gule Huse, hvor de gamle Kransebindersker boede,
indrammer endnu Gaden, og som for tyve Aar siden hænger endnu
-- som var det de samme -- tarvelige Vedbendkranse og Moskranse
med Evighedsblomster udenom de smaa Døre med Klinkelaase. I et
af Husene staar et Vindu aabent, og, hidkaldt ved Lyden af den
tidlige Morgenvandrer, stikker en Morlille Hovedet ud. Jeg køber
hendes Kranse, lægger den beskedne Betaling i hendes rynkede Haand,
og, fulgt af hendes Velsignelse, gaar jeg gennem Laagen ind paa
Kirkegaarden, hvor Fuglekvidder og Duft af Cypresser og morgenfriske
Blomster modtager mig.

Min Moders Grav ligger borte fra den alfare Vej, i en stille fjærn
Krog blandt Hundreder af andre Grave. Den usynlige Haand leder mig
ad de halvtilvoksede Stier, der snor sig mellem Græstuerne, og
saa staar jeg med ét foran den lille indhegnede Plet, hvor Moder
hviler, med et Barn ved hver Side: en større Tue mellem to ganske
smaa. Frisk Vedbend dækker alle Gravene og snor sig op om det
simple Marmorkors paa Moders Grav. Bag den, bøjende deres tunge
lilla og gyldne Blomsterklaser ned over den, staar en Guldregn
og et Syrentræ, og i hvert af det lille Kirkegaardsbeds fire
Hjørner folder Rosentræer deres lyserøde og hvide Knopper ud med
Morgensolens Smil gennem Regntaarerne fra Natten.

Jeg sætter mig paa den grønne Tremmebænk, jeg kærtegner med Blikket
Navnet paa Korset ligeoverfor og jeg taler med min Moder.

»Jeg er kommen til Dig, Moder, for at finde Fred. I tyve Aar har jeg
været borte fra Dig, langt, langt borte blandt fremmede Mennesker.
Da jeg sidst sad her og tog Afsked med Dig, vidste jeg ikke, hvad
jeg mistede. Jeg var et Barn og Du en ung Hustru. Nu er Du en klog
gammel Kone, og jeg en dagtræt Mand med Haar, der begynder at
graane. Skænk mig den Fred, Du forlængst har vundet, og jeg bliver
hos Dig.«

Jeg synes min Moder sidder overfor mig, en gammel Kone med hvidt
Haar og milde brune Øjne. Jeg glemmer Tiden, mens jeg ser ind i de
Øjne, til jeg vækkes ved, at Kirkeklokken sender syv skingre Slag
ind over Kirkegaarden. Jeg tager Kransene, dem jeg stadig bærer paa
Armen, og lægger dem, knælende, paa Graven. »Tak, Moder. Tak for
alt -- i gamle Dage og nu.«

Men mit Hjærte rummer ogsaa en anden Tak, mens jeg langsomt, omsust
af Fuglekvidder og Vindens Leg i Trækronerne, forlader den stille,
sødt duftende Dødens Have. En Tak til den gamle Bys Trofasthed, der
ikke har ladet min Moders Grav ligge øde, men har fredet og hæget
om den. Findes vel saadan lang Hukommelse og bestandig Troskab i de
store Stæder, hvor hver Dags Nyt jager støjende frem og puffer alt
forbigangent til Side? Dér mindes man kun Døden i pralende Opraab i
Avisernes Avertissementsspalter. Dér er Kirkegaardene altfor store
og altfor langt borte. De Døde faar skøtte sig selv. Den gamle By
har de Døde i sin Midte, altid nærværende, levende i en kærlig
Hukommelse. Jeg takker Jer, min Moders Venner i den gamle By, jeg
kender Jer ikke længer, jeg bringer Jer mit Hjærtes stille Tak.

       *       *       *       *       *

-- -- Jeg ender min Morgenvandring paa Vejrbakken, og dér bliver
jeg.

Vejrbakken ligger lige udenfor den gamle By, er dens Lystanlæg,
dens Stolthed. Sjældent fandt ogsaa en By saa herlig en Plet til
en offenlig Park. En gavmild Borger »anlagde« og beplantede for et
Aarhundred siden Vejrbakken, delte den ved Trapper og Vindelalléer
i Terrasser, skærmede den med Gran og Fyr og lod i Ly deraf Bøge og
Sirbuske vokse op, tog Magten fra Vestenvinden og lod Solen herske,
skabte saaledes af den golde Vejr-Bakke en frugtbar Have. Herop
drager den gamle Bys Beboere Sommer-Eftermiddage med Madkurve og
Flaskefoder, faar Vand paa Maskine fra Pavillonen paa den første
Terrasse og gør sig det hyggeligt i Lysthusene. Men paa Terrasserne
ovenfor, i »Skoven«, gaar Drengenes Røverleg.

Jeg kommer til Vejrbakken med en hemmelig Angst for at blive
skuffet. For min Erindring fra Barneaarene staar den som noget rent
æventyragtig stort og skønt. Bakken et Bjærg, Skoven en Urskov.

Jeg ser med et Smil Storagtigheden forsvunden. Baade Bakke og Træer
synes mig at være voksede nedad. Der er intet æventyrligt, intet
fantastisk ved Vejrbakken. Men dens Skønhed er paalidelig nok. En
yndigt smilende Idyl. Alligevel mangler Vejrbakken ikke Storhed. Den
har sin Udsigt.

Jeg er naaet op til »Pavillonen«, en gul Trævilla, udenfor hvilken
en Opvarter og en Hærskare af Spurve er ifærd med at rense de
smaa Beværtningsborde for Madkurvenes Affald. Jeg vender mig om
og blændes. For min Fod har jeg hele Byen og bag den Fjorden, der
bugter sig som en spejlklar Flod mellem Bakker og Enge. Milevidt
naaer Blikket til begge Sider. En Uendelighed af Himmel, Vand
og sommerfrodigt dansk Land. Og Byen, hvis røde Tage synes som
rutschede ned ad Vejrbakkens grønne Skraaninger.

Her har jeg hele min gamle By. Og i samme Nu føler jeg, at her maa
jeg bo. Jeg lader Opvarteren kalde paa Værten, og fem Minutter efter
er jeg indkvarteret i Pavillonens to Kvistværelser, som ellers ikke
udlejes, -- Pavillonen har overhovedet ikke liggende Gæster -- men
som overlades mig, da jeg tilbyder at leje dem for Vinteren med.

Og nu har jeg mit fremtidige Hjem i Orden. Her er ingen Luksus, men
alt hvad jeg behøver: en god Seng i Soveværelset og i min Dagligstue
et Arbejdsbord, nogle Stole -- ja ovenikøbet en Sofa.

Mine Bøger er pakkede ud, mine Piber stoppede. Siden jeg var ung
Student, har jeg ikke smagt Pibe.

Gud være med Jer, Havannacigarer og Cigaretter -- hvad er I dog mod
de Drag af uforfalsket hollandsk Knaster, som jeg i dette Øjeblik
ryger, mens jeg sidder ved mit Kvistvindue og skuer ud over min
gamle By!




IV.


                                                      _12. Juni._

Øverst oppe paa Vejrbakken, ovenover Skoven, paa den aabne Bakkekam
knejser Møllen, hvid med sorte Vinger, paa sin grønne Jordvold. Det
er den bedste Mølle i Egnen, thi den har altid Vind nok. Den tjener
tillige som Sømærke for Skibene paa Fjorden. Den ses i flere Miles
Afstand.

Mølleren ejer Jorden oppe paa Bakken saa langt ned, til Anlægget
begynder. Skrænten mod Nord, mod Fjorden, ligger øde og udyrket. Men
paa Skraaningen mod Syd er et stort Stykke indhegnet og opdyrket til
Have. Mølleren har taget Lære af den Mand, der anlagde Lystanlægget.
Han har trodset Vind og Vejr, har rejst en skærmende Hæk mod Vest,
har blandet Bakkens sandede Jord med møjsommelig tilkørt fed Muld
fra Agerlandet, har gødet og vandet, grøftet og gravet, indtil han
saa' sin hængende Have trives og blomstre.

Jeg mindes den halvt uvillige Respekt, hvormed Mølleren omtaltes
af Byens Folk. Man beundrede hans Dygtighed, men frastødtes af
hans brydske Særlinge-Væsen. Det stod i hans Kontrakt med Byen, af
hvem han købte sin Grund, at den til enhver Tid skulde staa aaben
for Folk, der vilde nyde Udsigten. Men skønt han ikke gjorde noget
Forsøg paa at omgaa denne Kontrakt, følte Byens Beboere sig ikke vel
paa hans Enemærker. I hvert Fald holdt man sig i ærbødig Afstand
fra hans Hus og hans Have. Selv vi Drenge, der nødigt gik af Vejen
for et Vikingetogt ind i en Frugthave, lod om Efteraaret Møllerens
berømte Pærer og Æbler modnes i Fred. Der gik ogsaa ganske ondartede
Rygter om Mølleren. Det fortaltes saaledes, at han behandlede sin
unge smukke Kone, en Proprietærdatter fra en Egn sydpaa, med
tyrannisk Haardhed. Maaske Rygterne blot kom af, at Møllerens Kone
levede lige saa afsondret og indesluttet som han selv -- noget,
den gæstevenlige og selskabelige Befolkning vanskeligt opfattede
som frivilligt --; blidere blev ialfald Rygterne ikke, da den unge
Kone døde faa Maaneder efter sin første Barselseng, efterladende
sin Mand en lille Datter, som hverken fik Amme eller Barnepige, men
passedes af Mølleren selv og hans Svend. Den lille Pige, Genstand
for hele Byens Beklagelse, var vel en 2-3 Aar, da vi rejste bort.
Med sky Nysgærrighed havde jeg ofte betragtet hende, naar hun i sin
Barnevogn -- en simpel Trækasse paa fire Hjul -- blev rullet af den
gamle skutryggede Svend rundt paa Møllevolden.

       *       *       *       *       *

-- -- Jeg har hver Dag været en Tur oppe ved Møllen. Vi har haft
Vestenstorm. Jeg har nydt det storartede Skue af Fjorden i Oprør, og
jeg har, da Stormen løjede af, lyttet til det fjærne Tordendrøn fra
Vest: Dønningerne fra Havet fem Mil borte.

Jeg fandt Møllen paa sin Plads; men til min Forbavselse stod
Vingerne stille. Jeg tænkte: »Mølleren maa have forandret sig meget
paa sine gamle Dage. Han kan nok ikke længer lide at lade Møllen
gaa i Storm.« Men ogsaa idag, da det er Magsvejr og kun blæser
en almindelig skikkelig Vind oppe over Skoven, hvilede Møllen i
urokkelig Ligegyldighed. Vinden ruskede i de rebede Sejl, den muntre
Bygesol legede gennem Vingernes Ribber. Men Møllen lod sig ikke
vække. Og det allervidunderligste: støttet op mod en af Vingerne,
saa trygt dvælende som kunde der slet ingen Fare tænkes, stod en ung
Kvinde i en tætsluttende blaa Lærreds Kjole, med Armene korslagte
over det høje Bryst, og stirrede ud over det vide Land. Hun hørte
mig ikke, saa' mig ikke. Hun syntes, lig en Tornerose, at drømme ved
Foden af den sovende Mølle.

Skulde Mølleren være død? Og ingen Efterfølger have taget Møllen og
Arbejdet i Arv?

Da jeg for lidt siden kom hjem, spurgte jeg i Forbigaaende min Vært,
om den gamle Møller endnu boede deroppe. Jo, det gjorde han.




V.


                                                      _19. Juni._

Hver Dag gaar jeg lange Ture i Byen og gennemstrejfer den paa
Kryds og Tværs. For hvert Skridt vaagner en Erindring. Jeg
føler mig som en Opdagelsesrejsende i min egen Sjæl: der bygger
sig, Sten paa Sten, op i mig et Kongerige af gode Minder, jeg i
mange Aar har ladet falde i Ruiner. Den gamle By med Barndommens
Søndagsstemning bliver levende i mig, og den befolkes med et Mylr
af kære Skikkelser. Nogle af dem træffer jeg endnu spadserende om i
Gaderne. Gamle Adjunkter, allerede gamle den Gang, jeg var blandt
deres Elever, vandrende samme sindige eller skyndsomt trippende
Gang til Skolen; ærværdige Borgermænd, hvis smilende gæstfri
Ansigter jeg mindes fra deres Sønners Børneselskaber, og unge
travle Forretningsfolk, af hvis alvorsfulde Familjeforsørger-Miner
jeg pludselig ser en gammel forglemt Legekammerats Barnetræk kigge
frem. Jeg gaar som Harun al Raschid i Bagdads Gader. Iagttagende,
genkendende uden selv at blive hverken kendt eller iagttaget. Kun en
Gang imellem møder jeg et skottende, prøvende Blik, der siger: Naa,
der er nok kommen en Fremmed til Byen.

Der er andre Skikkelser, som stiger frem for mig, mens jeg studerer
Butikskiltenes Navne. Det forekommer mig, naar jeg finder de samme
Butiker og samme Købmands-, Bager- og Haandværker-Navne paa samme
Plads, jeg sidst saa' dem, som om den gamle By havde standset sit
Liv og sin Udvikling den Dag, vi forlod den. Jeg maa ræsonnere for
mig selv: »det er jo dog kun tyve Aar siden.« Thi jeg føler mig som
en gammel, gammel Mand, der efter at have levet mange Menneskealdre
i Troldenes Høj, vender tilbage til min Hjemstavn. Jeg kan egenlig
slet ikke forstaa, at ikke alt er forandret og at ikke alle de
Mennesker, jeg kendte, er døde.

Mange af dem er det dog. Om nogle véd jeg det af Beretning, om andre
slutter jeg det, fordi jeg ikke finder dem i deres vante Krog. Ogsaa
disse Skikkelser lever op for mig af den Stenbro, de før traadte og
som jeg nu træder uden at møde dem.

Allertydeligst ser jeg for mig den Frøken, som holdt Skole for bedre
Folks Smaadrenge i den gamle By. Det tykke rare gamle Menneske, til
hvem Mødrene saa trygt betroede deres Poder, thi hun tog sig dem an
ikke blot som Skolemesterinde, men noksaa meget som en Barnepige og
Kæletante. Hende var det, der med sine buttede Fingre hjalp os af
med vore Mælketænder, naar de begyndte at rokke; til hende blev vi
sendt de Dage, hvor vore Forældre formedelst et Storkebesøg eller
andre forstyrrende Familjeanliggender vilde være af med os. Hun
forærede os de første Komediebilletter, og, naar vi betalte vore
fire Mark i Skolepenge hver Maanedsdag, gav hun dem af os, hvis
Forældre sad i smaa Kaar, de to tilbage som en Foræring til at købe
»noget nyttigt« for. Hende endelig var det, der til Fornøjelse for
os Drenge laa og svedte i Sengen Fastelavns-Mandag til langt op paa
Dagen, for at vi alle kunde naa at rise hende op og blive belønnede
med de Boller, hun i en stor Torvekurv havde staaende under Sengen.

Du gode, gamle Pige, i dit store Hjærte bankede al den gamle Bys
barnlige Troskyldighed. Jeg rejser Dig et Æres-Minde, det, dine
Drenge altfor længe har skyldt Dig.




VI.


                                                      _20. Juni._

Naturligvis er den unge Kvinde, jeg saa' oppe paa Møllen forleden,
Møllerens Datter. Jeg Dumrian, som ikke straks begreb det. Hun maa
jo nu være en forlængst voksen Pige.

Jeg kan ikke faa hende ud af mine Tanker. Saa stolt hun stod dér,
højtsvævende, vidtskuende, ovenover Byen og Skoven, ja ovenover
selve Vejrbakken. Hvilke Drømme svulmede mon i hendes Barm, hvilke
Længsler var det mon, som hendes korslagte Arme knugede tilbage?
Saa' hun fra sit høje Bo med Foragt ned paa Menneskenes jordbundne
Stræben, eller gik hendes Hu mod at stige ned og være med i den
travle Færden?

Helst tænker jeg mig hende som den store Freds Gudinde, den
Gudinde, jeg dyrker. Her paa Vejrbakken er hendes Tempel rejst,
og af Møllen bygger jeg hende et Højalter. Herop kalder hun til
livsalig Fred i Naturens ubesmittede Rige den, som mødig søger bort
fra Hverdagslivets Støv og Møje. Hendes Skød har Engens duftende
Kløverhvile for den trætte Vandrers Hoved, hendes Øje spejler
Himlens Blaa og hendes Stemme synger Vindens hviskende Vuggesang i
Træernes Kroner.

Er jeg en Nar, Du smukke Møllerdatter, at jeg fæster Digtningens
Glorie om din Pande, kaarer Dig til min Lykkedrøms Gudinde? Er
Du maaske en ganske jævn lille Borgerpige, der skikkeligt længes
mod Kæreste, Lysning og Brudeseng? Har Du maaske allerede fundet
din Møllersvend? Var det ham, Du spejdede efter, da Du stod paa
Højalteret?

Ligemeget: jeg lader Dig staa, som min Drøm har stillet Dig.
Jeg kender Dig ikke og vil ikke lære Dig at kende. Ingen brutal
Virkelighed skal skænde dit hellige Billed.




VII.


                                                      _25. Juni._

Jeg fik idag gennem min Forlægger Post fra Hovedstaden. En Bunke
ligegyldige Breve, et Brev ogsaa fra min Elskerinde.

Hun spørger forundret, krænket og bedrøvet, om jeg er sunken i
Jorden. Hun har forgæves ventet og søgt mig. Af en fælles Bekendt
har hun saa hørt Rygtet om, at jeg skulde være rejst til Udlandet
med en Dame. Og hun sender mig nu sit Brev paa Maa og Faa, efter
min gamle Adresse: »Jeg véd jo ikke, om det naaer Dig. Dog syntes
jeg, jeg paa en eller anden Maade maatte spørge Dig, hvorvidt Rygtet
taler sandt. Jeg maa jo næsten tro det. Men har jeg da fortjent, at
Du handler saadan mod mig? Har jeg nogensinde forbrudt mig? Har jeg
ikke altid tværtimod føjet Dig i ét og alt, gjort mig Umage for at
være netop saadan som Du vilde have mig; ikke plaget Dig hverken med
Overhæng eller Skinsyge? Nu, Du har tilføjet mig saa bitter en Sorg,
vilde jeg ønske, jeg kunde hade Dig. Jeg kan det ikke. Skriv blot to
Ord, at Du vil komme snart tilbage til mig, og jeg elsker Dig nu som
altid.«

Hun kan ikke hade mig, hun bilder sig ind, hun elsker mig. Jeg tror
ikke paa, at Kærlighed og Had er hinandens nødvendige Supplementer.
Jeg føler mig tværtimod overbevist om, at den største Kærlighed
aldrig, hvor forsmædeligt den end martres, slaar om i Hadets
Modsætning. Men _hun_, der sender mig dette Turteldue-Brev, er
kun Due, forsaavidt som hun forstaar at kurre elskovssygt, kan
ingensinde blive en Høg, thi hun mangler den Følelsens Fanatisme,
der hvæsser Klør og Næb. Hun valgte mig til Elsker, fordi det
behagede hendes Forfængelighed at blive foretrukken af mig. Hun
føler en vis Tomhed nu, jeg er borte. Hun ønsker at faa mig
tilbage; thi det krænker hende, at jeg af egen Drift er gaaet fra
hende. Men om føje Tid vil den Lykke, hun begærer, atter blomstre
for hende. Den tomme Plads vil blive optagen af en ny Elsker, der
har om end andre saa ligesaa store Fortrin som jeg. Hendes Nag imod
mig vil svinde, og naar vi ad Aare atter ses, vil vi hilse fornøjet
paa hinanden som to Venner, der aldrig har haft noget Livsens Alvor
sammen, næppe nok nogen minde- eller glemselværdig Oplevelse.

Det er Sagen. Og det er Forklaringen af, at jeg kunde rejse bort
uden at føle det som en Nødvendighed at tage Afsked med hende. Her
var ikke Tale om et Brud. Hvad skulde jeg sagt hende andet end
et valent »Tak for denne Gang«? Her var end ingen Knude at hugge
over, kun en løst sammenhæftet Kotillonssløjfe at skille i sine to
Baand, det hvide og det røde. Jeg kunde ikke overvinde mig til at
sige de behørige sløve Trøstens- og Takkeord ved denne Skin-Grav.
Jeg skammede mig ved at spille med i en Scene af saa aabenlys
Uvederhæftighed, at give Repliken til hende, der sikkert ikke havde
nægtet sig den Fornøjelse at forsøge sig i det store Drama efter de
bedste Mønstre.

Naar jeg besluttede at bryde op fra Hovedstaden, var maaske
ogsaa, dybest inde, det den stærkeste Bevæggrund, at jeg vilde
bort ikke just fra hende, min sidste Elskerinde, men fra hele den
Elskovs-Sport, som leges i den store Bys Overflade-Selskab og som
jeg med saamegen Iver havde dyrket. Havde dyrket mest fordi jeg
derved tilfredsstillede en Lyst til at haane Kærligheden, til at
rive den ned fra det svimlende høje Fodstykke, som min Ungdoms
blinde Tro byggede den med det Resultat, at jeg selv en skønne Dag
laa værkbruden paa Jorden.

Jeg havde elsket og var blevet skuffet. Jeg tvang min Sorg i mig,
jeg svor en stille Ed, at for første og sidste Gang havde jeg været
Kærlighedens Nar. Var jeg bleven erobret, vilde jeg nu erobre.
Havde man leget med mig, vilde jeg nu lege med andre. Ikke havde
jeg nogen Lyst til at gøre ondt, som der var gjort mig ondt. Jeg
vilde blot tage Kærligheden ovenfra, saadan som den en Gang havde
taget mig i Nakken. Og jeg vilde lære andre at gøre det. Lære dem,
at Kærlighed ikke er værd at regnes for andet end en Spas. Mindst
af alt noget at sætte Livet ind paa. Jeg lærte, at i Kærlighed
sætter man altid Livet ind, ogsaa naar man netop ikke vil det. Jeg
følte mit Liv forspildes, mens jeg troede mig ifærd med at gøre mig
til Kærlighedens Herre. Jeg vaagnede en Morgen i Angst: Se, Aarene
svinder. Hvor er de henne alle de, Du legede med? Hvad har Du samlet
i Lade af de Følelser, Du saaede ud for Vejr og Vind? Draabevis lod
Du dit Hjærte forbløde og lægge sig øde, gav lidet og fik intet, gav
saa ofte, at Du snart intet vil have tilbage.

Jeg vil svare min fortørnede Elskerinde: Jeg ønsker Dig, der var min
altfor lærvillige Elev, at Du en Gang maa træffe En, der lærer Dig
at elske.

Maaske vil jeg da ialfald lære hende at hade.

Thi dum er hun ikke.




VIII.


                                            _Sidste Dage i Juni._

Jeg vil skrive en Bog om den gamle By. Ikke som den er -- jeg bryder
mig sletikke om med en moderne Kunsts kritisk-psykologiske Metode,
der ogsaa staar til min Raadighed, at bore Sonden i den og krænge
dens Indvolde ud --, hellerikke som den var, men saadan som jeg ser
og genser den under Barndomsmindets blaa Glas ... i en Soldis af
stille Glæde og Vemod uden Bitterhed. Det skal være en Bog for alle
dem, der, ligesom jeg, trænger til at sætte sig hen i en lun og god
Krog, hvor der er stængt af for Omverdenen og hvor Sjælen for en
Stund kan leve sit Blomsterliv i en Klosterhave. Det bliver en Bog
uden pirrende Nyt, uden blændende Farver, der bliver ingen Spænding,
næppe nok Handling i den. Mit Maal vil være naaet, om de, der læser
den, fornemmer det, som om jeg havde bragt en Buket af enkelt
farvede, enkelt duftende Markblomster ind i deres Stue.

Tre Gange om Ugen er Stiftsbiblioteket aabent. Da sidder jeg i
Læsestuen og blader i de gulnede Folianter, hvor i sirlig snørklet
Skrift den gamle Bys Liv og Begivenheder er optegnede. Jeg faar
vel næppe Brug for de Studier, jeg gør. Men jeg indsuger gennem
Fordybelsen i de henfarne Tider den Stemning af sagtmodig Fjærnhed,
hvormed jeg gærne vil fylde min Bog. Det er hellerikke alene for de
gamle Folianters Skyld, jeg søger Biblioteket. Selve Stedet drager
mig. Ofte glemmer jeg rent Bøgerne, der ligger foran mig, læner mig
tilbage i den brede slidte Svinelæders Armstol og fortaber mig i
drømmende Beskuelse. Biblioteket er indrettet i det gamle Brødrehus,
hvor i den katolske Tid Munkene boede og hvor i de første
Aarhundreder efter Reformationen Latinskolen holdtes. Den Stue, hvor
jeg sidder, var Klosterets Refektorium. Et temmelig langt Rum med
hvidkalkede Mure og tre lave spidse Loftsbuer. I den ene Langvæg
er Dørbuen -- saa lav, at en voksen Mand maa bukke sig for at gaa
igennem. Den aabner Udsigt ind til Biblioteks-Stuerne med deres
Reoler fulde af falmede gule og blaa Bogrygge. Paa den anden Langvæg
er der tre Vinduer, et for hver af Loftsbuerne. Vinduer, der sidder
i dybe buede Udskæringer og med smaabitte blyindfattede Ruder, som
Solen har brændt grønne og røggule. Vinduerne naaer næsten ned til
Jorden, og udenfor er Bibliotekarens Have, et Hjørne af den gamle
Klosterhave og Kirkegaard. Det er en frugtbar Jord med svulmende
Buskadser og et prangende Blomsterflor i fede skinnende Græsplæner.
Mellem en Klynge af bugnende tunge Frugttræer staar en høj, flad,
halvt forvitret Gravsten med en næsten udvisket Indskrift. Oftest
dvæler dog mit Blik ved den høje gule Mur, som omslutter Haven og
vender ud til en smal Gyde. Der er et Sted, hvor denne Mur bliver
dobbelt, dannende et lille Indelukke. Paa Indermuren ses Spor af
raat tilhugne Trin, og i Indelukket vantrives et ældgammelt Træ, der
nu kun løves i enkelte Grene.

Jeg ser paa Trinene i Muren, paa Træet i Indelukket og jeg drømmer
om den unge Munk, der har siddet her, hvor jeg nu sidder, og lyttet
til de gamle Brødres Pludren efter Nadveren. Men hans Tanker er
andetsteds, han følger Solnedgangens gyldne Spil i Løvet udenfor
de lave Vinduer og hans Hjærte banker uroligt. Saa er Brødrene
gaaet til Hvile, Natten har sænket sig over Klosterhaven. Men
forsigtigt aabnes Døren til Refektoriet, den unge Munk lister sig
hen til et af Vinduerne, løsner dets Hængsler og svinger sig ud i
Haven, famler sig i den mørke Nat frem til Muren, staar nu paa det
øverste af Trinene, bøjer en af Træets Grene ned til sig, lader den
vippe tilbage og er i Indelukket, hvor hans Elskede, formummet i
Mandsklæder, venter ham og bliver hos ham, mens Nattergalene slaar i
Klosterhavens Buske.

Jeg vil skrive en Bog om den gamle By og dens Klosterfred. Jeg vilde
ogsaa gærne lade Nattergalene synge over den unge Munk og hans
forborgne Kærligheds-Lykke.




IX.


                                                       _1. Juli._

Der er hændet mig en Stump af et Æventyr.

Jeg sidder i Morges, som sædvanlig, udenfor Pavillonen og fodrer
mine Spurve. Mange Spurve var der paa Vejrbakken, da jeg kom
hertil. De er blevne flere Dag for Dag, og de forfremmes stadig i
Dristighed. Efterhaanden kommer de bogstavelig ind i min Stue for at
se, om jeg ikke har noget til dem, og naar jeg en Morgen lader vente
paa mig med Affodringen, melder de sig med at pikke paa mine Vinduer
og med utaalmodige Skrig i Vindueskarmen.

Vi er netop naaede til Afslutningsnumret: et stort Stykke Hvedebrød,
som jeg lægger midt paa Bordet og som hele Banden styrter sig over,
hakker og river og slider i, indtil et dristigt Par ved forenede
Kræfter, efter et behændigt Indhug, slæber af med den sidste
Kæmpebid.

I det samme faar jeg Øje paa en ung lysklædt Pige, der staar paa
Trappen op til den øvre Bakkeafsats og som aabenbart har overværet
min Leg med Spurvene. Hun rødmer, da mit Blik møder hendes; hun
synes forvirret ved at blive overrasket i at have beluret mig, hun
gør en Bevægelse som for at vende om og flygte, saa betænker hun
sig, gaar med rolige Skridt ned ad Trappen og styrer lige hen til
mig.

Jeg rejser mig og hilser, hun gør en svag Bøjning med Hovedet, siger
saa med en Sikkerhed, der maaske er tilkæmpet, men synes naturlig:
»Jeg har noget til Dem.« Og hun tager op af Lommen et sammenlagt
Blad og giver mig det. Jeg ser forbavset paa hende og aabner
Papiret. »Ikke sandt« -- spørger hun -- »det er Deres? Jeg kendte
Dem, da jeg før saa' Dem.« Det, hun giver mig, er et Blad, som
fløj fra mig under Overrejsen paa Skibet og hvorpaa jeg har skrevet
nogle meget aabenhjærtige Linjer. »Ja, det er mit,« svarer jeg. »Men
hvorfra kender De mig og hvorledes vidste De, at det Papir tilhørte
mig?«

Hun smiler fornøjet: »Kender De slet ikke mig? ... Aa nej,
naturligvis; det var dumt af mig at spørge; De saa' mig vist næppe
nok.«

Nu har jeg det. Og jeg udbryder triumferende: »Det var Dem, der
ombord pludselig i Solopgangen stod ved Siden af mig!« »Rigtigt. Paa
det nær, at jeg ikke »pludselig« stod der. Jeg er ingen Heks eller
anden Slags Troldtøj, selv om jeg bor paa en Høj.«

At jeg ikke straks saa' det: det er jo Møllerens Datter. Pigen oppe
fra Højalteret.

Saa rækker hun mig Haanden. »Farvel og tilgiv, at jeg forstyrrede
Dem. Men jeg tænkte« -- og hun saa' alvorligt paa mig -- »at De
maaske gærne vilde have det Papir igen. Og da jeg fandt det paa
Skibet ved Landgangen, var De borte.«

Jeg stod og saa' efter hende, mens hun, med sin faste rolige Gang,
gik fra mig hen til Trappen, let og hastigt løb op og var borte som
et hvidt Syn mellem de mørke Graner.

Jeg havde paa Læben et Raab for at kalde hende tilbage, jeg var paa
Springet til at ile efter hende. Jeg syntes, der var saa meget endnu
jeg skulde spurgt hende om, talt med hende om, forklaret hende. Dog
i det samme tænkte jeg: »Nej, det er smukkest, som det er. De Ord,
der faldt mellem os, bryder ingen Stemning. Min Gudinde er stegen
ned fra Bjærget, har aabenbaret sig for mig et flygtigt Nu og er
atter forsvunden.«

Men jeg staar længe og stirrer med store Øjne paa den Plet, hvor hun
forsvandt.




X.


                                                       _2. Juli._

Er hun smuk? Hvordan ser hun egenlig ud? -- Jeg vil prøve paa at
klare mig det Indtryk, hun har gjort paa mig.

Luften bliver høj og ren dér, hvor hun træder. Hun er saa nyskabt i
sin Fuldmodenhed, straalende af ung Sundhed og uvilkaarlig Godhed.
Hendes Øjne er dybe og ømme, men klare og aabenhjærtige som et
Barns. Enten de smiler eller mørknes i Alvor, siger de deres Mening
lige ret ud, der er ingen Fordulgthed i Krogene. Hendes Barm er høj
og rund, hendes Midie slank, hendes Hofter yppige. Men hun bærer
sin rankvoksne Frodighed saa ubekymret som et Træ sin Sommerpragts
Fylde. Skred hun igennem en Lejr af berusede Krigsfolk, de vilde,
uden selv at vide hvorfor, aabne hende en bred Vej. Saa unærmelig
synes hun. Og dog saa dragende. Fra Haaret, der, skilt i Midten,
falder i to brune Bølger om hendes hvide Pande, til Fødderne, der i
taktfast Lethed fører hende hen over Jorden, danner hendes Person
og Væsen Indbegrebet af retlinjet Sikkerhed. Hun kender sin Vej og
sit Maal som den lyse Dag. Hos hende vilde man føle sig tryg. Hun
er uden Svig og Svinkeærinder, hun bringer med sig den Luft, som er
ovenover By og Skov. Hun drager som et Alter. Knælende maa man nærme
sig hende. Hun er Kvinden, som hun udgik af Naturens Haand: paa
samme Tid Jomfru og Moder.

Saadant er det Indtryk, jeg ubevidst modtog af hende allerede, da
hun stod i Solopgangen paa Skibet, og siden da jeg saa' hende oppe
paa Møllen, lænet til de hvilende Vinger. Og saadan aabenbarede hun
sig forgangen Dag for mig.

Paa det Papir, hun bragte mig tilbage, havde jeg skrevet: »Min Sjæl
raaber i Vaande paa en Moder.« Formodenlig har hun læst det. Jeg
føler ingen Undseelse derover. _Hun_ maa gærne kende mit Hjærtes
Hemmeligheder. Hun vil ikke spotte mig, ikke forraade mig.

Maaske viser hun sig ikke mere for mig. Ialfald faar jeg næppe
Lejlighed til oftere at tale med hende. Jeg synes dog, jeg nu har i
min Nærhed en forstaaende Ven og Medvider, En, hvis Sympati mildt
omsvæver mig, En, jeg ikke vilde frygte at søge Hjælp hos, om jeg
var i Nød. Naar jeg ensom vandrer i Skoven, ser jeg hendes Ansigt
smile mig imøde mellem Træerne, jeg gaar saa let og trygt, som
holdt jeg hendes faste varme Haand i min. Og gribes jeg stundom af
Tilbagefaldets forvirrende Tanker og hede Begær, maner jeg hendes
Billed frem som Værn. Og et svalende Aandepust køler mit Sind til Ro.

Hun er altid hos mig som min Skytsaand.




XI.


                                                       _4. Juli._

Jeg har en Veninde i Stiftelsen. Stiftelsen er et Alderdomshjem
for gamle Jomfruer og Enker. Min Veninde, en Jomfru paa henimod 70
Somre, er en af Stiftelsens yngste Beboere, hun anses af de Andre
for et rent Barn. Alligevel er hun Anstaltens Veteran. Hun har
nemlig været der, fra hun virkelig var Barn, slap derind, mod al
Skik og Brug, sammen med sin Moder, fordi hun var saa svagelig, at
hun, ifølge Lægernes Mening, kun havde en stakket Stund at leve.
Saa laa hun til Sengs i mange Aar, og da hun begyndte at komme sig,
var Moderen død, og man beholdt den nu 30-40 aarige Pige, der ikke
havde andre Paarørende end Stiftelsen.

I hendes Celle, den hun beboede sammen med tre andre Damer, --
Stiftelsens Beboere kaldte altid hinanden ceremonielt for »Damerne«
--, tilbragte jeg mange af min Barndoms lykkeligste Dage. Hun havde
utallige Talenter. Ingen fortalte saa dejlige Æventyr som hun,
hendes Forraad var uudtømmeligt, thi hun digtede dem selv; og ingen
kunde saamange Kortkunster. Desuden var hun en sand Kunstnerinde
med sine Hænder: klippede alle Slags Figurer af Papir, lavede den
vidunderligste Juletræspynt og flettede af Straa de nydeligste Kurve
og Æsker. Den sidste Færdighed, som hun drev til virkelig Kunst,
havde hun lært sig i de mange Aar, hun laa til Sengs. Madratsen
leverede Straaet, Resten besørgede hendes Fantasi og Snille.

At besøge hende var for et Barn at komme til Æventyrets Land. Altid
var her sælsomme Ting at høre og se. Og saa fik man til paa Købet
den dejligste Kop Kaffe, Kaffe med brun Kandis, som ikke kom i
Koppen, men suttedes og knasedes, mens man nød Nektaren.

Jeg var hos hende idag. I den lange sandstrøede Gang stod nu, som
før, gamle Koner, der nejede og nysgærrigt stak Hovederne sammen, og
den kendte Duft af Indelukkethed, Lavendler og sippet Renlevned slog
mig i Møde. Jeg bankede paa Døren til den Stue, som min Veninde har
beboet i et halvt Aarhundred, mens Hold paa Hold af Kontubernaler
er lagte i Kisten og baarne bort. I det smalle lange Rum med et
Vindue, vendende ud mod Stiftelsens Grønnehave, dybest inde sad fire
gamle Kvinder, hver paa sit Territorium, en Fjerdedel af Stuen, hvor
der akkurat er Plads til en Seng ved den ene Væg, en Kommode og et
Servantebord ved den anden Væg og to Stole imellem. Min Indtræden
vakte betuttet Nyfigenhed hos Stuens Beboere. Strikketøjet sank ned
i Skødet paa dem, og med spørgende Miner afventede de, hvem Besøget
af den fremmede Herre kunde gælde. Jeg havde straks opdaget min
Veninde paa Primadonna-Pladsen ved Vinduet, graanet og rynket, endnu
mere mager end før, men med de samme kloge og fiffige Øjne. Og det
Liv, der kom over hende, da hun omsider genkendte mig. Hun blev helt
rød i Kinderne af Sindsbevægelse, aabnede Armene og trykkede mig
til sit indfaldne Bryst. »Ja, saa sandelig er det ikke ham! Og han
kommer her til mig!«

Saamegen Lykke har jeg aldrig drømt om at gøre. Jeg blev fejret som
en Prins. Min Veninde var ganske fortumlet. Ikke blot Stuens Damer
blev præsenterede for mig, hun hentede rundt fra Stuer og Gange
alle de Gamle, der havde kendt mine Forældre og set mig som Barn.
De stimede ind, rokkende Morliller og strunke Gammeljomfruer, de
trykkede mine Hænder, de puffedes om mig og pludrede i Munden paa
hinanden for at fortælle mig, hvor godt de mindedes mig, hvor nøje
de havde kendt mine Forældre, og for at spørge til hele Familjens
Befindende.

Kaffe fik jeg i Guds Velsignelse, men med Kandis'en kneb det. De
gamle Damer kunde ikke forsone sig med, at jeg ikke vilde have hvidt
Sukker.

Da jeg omsider gik, blev jeg fulgt til Dørs af den halve Stiftelse.
Men med min Veninde aftalte jeg, at vi, naar jeg kom igen, skulde
have det lidt mere for os selv.




XII.


                                                       _9. Juli._

Jeg fandt forleden i Biblioteket nogle Familjeoptegnelser, som jeg
fik Lyst til at kontrollere. Jeg var derfor idag oppe hos Præsten
for at faa Lov til at slaa efter i de gamle Kirkebøger.

Det var en ung høj Mand med et skarpt Ansigt og stærke, lyse Øjne.
Med største Forekommenhed gik han mig til Haande og lagde i det
hele et behageligt Verdensmands-Væsen for Dagen. Men vi havde ikke
samtalet i mange Minutter, før han røbede sig som en af den strænge
Kristendoms ivrigste Forkæmpere. Han førte Ordet; jeg sad og lyttede
halvt aandsfraværende til. Jeg forstod dog saameget, at han var
ifærd med at rydde op i den gamle Slendrian, hvori hans Forgængere
havde efterladt Byens kirkelige Forhold. Han skildrede den gamle
By som et Sodoma af Ugudelighed og Ryggesløshed. Alle Laster gik
i Svang: Drik, Usædelighed, Kortspil og Foreningsballer. De, som
roste den gamle By, kendte den ikke eller lod sig bedrage af dens
tilsyneladende Bravhed og Elskværdighed. Med Guds Hjælp skulde Piben
dog snart faa en anden Lyd. Allerede nu sporede han Frugter af sit
Vækkelses-Arbejde, og han var endda kun lige begyndt.

Det var saalænge siden, jeg havde hørt Fanatismens Ord. De buldrede
som en tom Torden over mit Hoved. Saa grim han saa' ud i sin
harmfulde Vrede, saa vanvittigt det lød, at denne unge rasende
Mand vilde lære skikkelige Borgerfolk Gudsfrygt. Jeg tænkte et Par
Gange paa at modsige ham, men opgav det. Jeg følte mig saa udenfor
Striden, og ingensinde har jeg dybere fornummet Lykken ved ikke at
være med længer. At tænke sig, at her gaar en Mand, som indbilder
sig at arbejde i en algod Guds Tjeneste, og fraader af Vrede, mens
Verden trænger til Mildhed og Fred. I Sandhed, Ulvene rives om
Lammene.

Da jeg rejser mig for at gaa, bliver Præsten pludselig atter den
belevne Verdensmand. Trykker mig varmt i Haanden, smiler venligt og
siger en Spøg om sin egen Hidsighed.

Men mens jeg vandrer hjemefter, ynker jeg min gamle By. Den har haft
sin gode Tid med de gamle Præster. De forstod den, de læmpede deres
Forkyndelse efter dens Behov. De sad gærne selv ved L'hombre-Bordet,
de kimsede ikke af et godt Glas, de glædede sig, naar de Unge
svingede sig i Dansen, og de græd ikke, naar de saa' en lidt for
trivelig Mø myrtesmykket træde frem for Brudeskamlen.

Jeg synes, Luften er bleven trykkende; der er ingen rigtig Fryd i
Solskinnet, Blæsten er kold og graa. Du gamle, sunde, livslystne By,
nu kommer din onde Besøgelsens Stund.

... Først i Vejrbakkens Sol ryster jeg Misstemningen af mig. Og dér
venter mig en Glæde, som fylder mig med de taabeligste Fantasier og
faar mit Hjærte til at slaa en ganske ungdommelig Stormmarsch.

Paa mit Arbejdsbord stod en Buket Roser. Et Bud havde bragt den uden
anden Besked end at den skulde stilles paa den fremmede Herres Bord.

Fra hvem skulde den være, om ikke fra hende? Hun har altsaa ikke
glemt mig; hun tænker paa mig; hun sender ovenikøbet en Hilsen. Et
Øjeblik formørkes min Henrykkelse ved Tanken om, at Buketten maaske
kunde være fra min Veninde i Stiftelsen. Nej, umuligt. Saa fine
Blomster gror ikke i den gamle By. De plukkes kun paa Vejrbakken, i
Møllerens Have.

Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi[10] was born on 2 October 1869[1] in Porbandar, a coastal town which was then part of the Bombay Presidency, British India.[11] He was born in his ancestral home, now known as Kirti Mandir.[12] His father, Karamchand Gandhi (1822–1885), served as the diwan (chief minister) of Porbander state, a small princely salute state in the Kathiawar Agency of British India.[12][13] His grandfather was Uttamchand Gandhi, also called Utta Gandhi.[12] His mother, Putlibai, who was from a Pranami Vaishnava family,[14][15] was Karamchand's fourth wife, the first three wives having apparently died in childbirth.[16][17]
The Indian classics, especially the stories of Shravana and king Harishchandra, had a great impact on Gandhi in his childhood. In his autobiography, he admits that they left an indelible impression on his mind. He writes: "It haunted me and I must have acted Harishchandra to myself times without number." Gandhi's early self-identification with truth and love as supreme values is traceable to these epic characters.[18][19]
In May 1883, the 13-year-old Mohandas was married to 14-year-old Kasturbai Makhanji (her first name was usually shortened to "Kasturba", and affectionately to "Ba") in an arranged child marriage, according to the custom of the region.[20] In the process, he lost a year at school.[21] Recalling the day of their marriage, he once said, "As we didn't know much about marriage, for us it meant only wearing new clothes, eating sweets and playing with relatives." However, as was prevailing tradition, the adolescent bride was to spend much time at her parents' house, and away from her husband.[22] In 1885, when Gandhi was 15, the couple's first child was born, but survived only a few days. Gandhi's father, Karamchand Gandhi, had also died earlier that year.[23] The religious background was eclectic. Gandhi's father was Hindu[24] Modh Baniya[25] and his mother was from Pranami Vaishnava family. Religious figures were frequent visitors to the home.[26]
Mohandas and Kasturba had four more children, all sons: Harilal, born in 1888; Manilal, born in 1892; Ramdas, born in 1897; and Devdas, born in 1900.[20] At his middle school in Porbandar and high school in Rajkot, Gandhi remained a mediocre student. He shone neither in the classroom nor on the playing field. One of the terminal reports rated him as "good at English, fair in Arithmetic and weak in Geography; conduct very good, bad handwriting." He passed the matriculation exam at Samaldas College in Bhavnagar, Gujarat, with some difficulty. Gandhi's family wanted him to be a barrister, as it would increase the prospects of succeeding to his father's post.[27]






XIII.


                                                      _20. Juli._

Nattergalene synger i Vejrbakkens Buske. Jeg har iaften vandret i
Skoven med min Møllerdatter, som hedder Grethe.

Saa lidt det i Grunden er, saa lidt mærkværdigt. Og dog synes jeg,
at der ingensinde er hændet mig noget større.

Jeg gaar i Skoven og jeg møder hende. Vi er Naboer, saa deri er
intet underligt. Vi kender hinanden, altsaa havde det været den
rimeligste Ting i Verden, om jeg havde standset hende og talt
til hende. Det var imidlertid hende, som standsede mig, hvori
hellerintet naturstridigt var.

Hun spurgte: Hvordan lever De? Omgaas De mange Mennesker? Savner De
ikke Hovedstaden?

Jeg svarede: Jeg bliver for hver Dag lykkeligere. Jeg omgaas Ingen,
savner Intet, i Forgaars fik jeg ovenikøbet en Buket Roser.

Hun siger nu, at Roserne var fra hende, og jeg frydes over, at hun
ingen Hemmelighed gør deraf. Hun siger, at hun havde faaet saadan
Lyst til at sende mig nogle af sine Blomster. »Jeg tænkte, det vilde
glæde Dem, fordi de er saa skønne og sjældne. Og jeg vilde gærne
glæde Dem.«

Jeg spurgte hende, hvorfor hun nærede saa venlige Følelser overfor
mig, en næsten Fremmed. Hun svarede: »Fordi jeg forstod, at De ikke
har været lykkelig. Og jeg, jeg har altid haft det saa godt.«

Jeg beder hende fortælle noget om sit Liv deroppe med Faderen i
Ensomheden ved Møllen. Hun ryster paa Hovedet: »Der er ikke stort
at fortælle. Jeg røgter mine Blomster, mine Bier og mine Frugter, og
jeg læser for min Fader. Vil De vide mere, saa kom selv op og se.
Vi, ligesom De, omgaas Ingen. Derfor vil vi passe sammen.« Og hun
tilføjer: »De behøver ikke at svare Ja eller Nej. Er De lykkelig ved
at være ene, vilde det være meningsløst, om De søgte Selskab. Men
synes De en Dag, at De har Brug for os, er De velkommen.«

Saa staar vi og skal byde Farvel. Men pludselig kommer jeg i Tanker
om, at der er noget, jeg har glemt at faa Rede paa, og jeg siger:
»Jeg saa' Dem en Dag oppe paa Møllen. De lænede Dem mod den ene
Vinge. Sæt nu, Møllen var begyndt at gaa!«

»Aa nej,« svarer hun, »der var ingen Fare. Møllen har i de sidste
Par Aar ikke gaaet. Fader er gammel og næsten blind, han er hørt op
med at drive Møllen.«

Hun nikker Farvel og gaar. Men jeg bliver staaende og hvisker tusind
Velsignelser efter hende, al den Takkens og Lykkens stille Musik,
som hun har fyldt mit Hjærte med.

Elsker jeg hende? Jeg tror det ikke; thi jeg begærer hende ikke.
Der er intet mellem os, som jeg ønsker andet og mere. Mine Sanser
ligger som lykkeligt smilende Vuggebørn og lytter til hendes Stemmes
Kærtegn. Hendes Øjnes store milde Varme svøber mig. Hendes Haandtryk
er Aftenbønnens Englevagt. Kunde det umulige tænkes, at hun i Nat
kom til min Dør og bad om at blive indladt, jeg vilde flygte som fra
en Vanhelligelse, jeg vilde føle mig som en Forbandet paa Jorden.
Som En, der har staaet ved Renselsens Kilde og set den grumses af at
spejle hans Billed.

Da jeg atter sidder i min Stue med hendes Roser foran mig, gribes
jeg af en Trang til at tilkendegive hende, hvormeget hendes Venskab
betyder for mig. I et hvidt Papir fæster jeg en af Roserne og
skriver nedenunder: »Fra En, den har gjort karsk«, haster op gennem
Skoven til Møllerhuset og fastgør Rosen over Døren. Jeg véd jo, at
den vil falde i de rette Hænder, da hendes Fader er blind.

Og jeg vandrer langsomt hjemad, mens Nattergalene synger i mit
Bryst.




XIV.


                                                      _29. Juli._

Jeg sidder i Morges nede paa Bolværket ved Havnen for at se
Dampskibet fra Hovedstaden komme. For at undgaa mulige Bekendte
blandt Passagererne har jeg sat mig lidt afsides, ved Oplagspladsen
for ankommende Varer. Jeg morer mig med at se ned i Vandet paa de
grønslimede Bolværkspæle, hvor Krabber kravler mellem fastgroede
Muslinger, og jeg tænker paa gamle Dage, da det var en Fest, naar
Dampskibet, den eneste daværende Kommunikation med Hovedstaden,
bragte Gæster i Besøg. Festen begyndte ved aarle Gry. Den Gang,
som nu, var Ankomsttiden meget skiftende. Under normale Forhold
skulde Skibet lægge i Havn Kl. 5, og fra det Klokkeslet gjaldt det
om at være parat; men faldt det i med en af de Taager, der udmærker
Fjorden og som i Løbet af faa Sekunder overtrækker den med et
uigennemsigtigt Bomulds-Slør fra Bred til Bred, kan Ventetiden blive
flere Timer lang. Ofte løb vi Børn fem, seks Gange frem og tilbage
for at melde vore Forældre Tilstanden. Endelig hejses Kurven paa
Fjordbakkens Signalstang, Taagen letter, nu kommer det, Skibet, det
længselsfuldt ventede, som bringer Tanter og Gaver samt megen fin
Mad og en Række af Fornøjelser i Udsigt.

Og det hænder, mens jeg idag sidder og opfrisker disse Minder,
at Taagen sænker sig over Fjorden, ligesom Skibet dukker frem
om den sidste Pynt. En graa Mur glider ned foran mig, jeg maa
sunde mig lidt, før jeg forstaar, hvad der er sket. Langt ude fra
lyder Dampskibets Taagehorn, jammerfuldt klagende, ængsteligt
varskoende. Men det er klart, at Kaptejnen, saa nær sit Maal,
forsøger at læmpe sig frem. Langsomt nærmer Taagehornets Tuden sig,
nu ses Mastetoppene ragende op over Skyen. Da, ligesaa pludselig
som den er kommen, forsvinder Taagen. Et Blændværk: i glitrende
Morgensol ligger Skibet et Par Hundred Alen fra Land og, forude paa
Overdækket, staar en ung høj Kvinde i et langt, mørkt Regnstykke.
Bedrager mit Syn mig? Er det hende? -- Uden at bryde mig om Per
eller Poul styrter jeg hen til Landgangen. Nu har den unge Dame
faaet Øje paa mig, hun vifter med sit Lommetørklæde. Det er hende!

Gud være lovet for det Smil, der lyser mig i Møde. Hun er altsaa
glad ved at se mig, glad ved saa uventet at træffe mig her.

Vi følges op gennem Byen. Jeg er saa betagen af Lykke, at jeg
ikke kan tale. Jeg gaar gennem _min_ By ved _hendes_ Side, og
jeg hører hende fortælle, hvordan det hænger sammen med hendes
Rejse. Hun kommer sammesteds fra som hin Morgen, jeg saa' hende
paa Skibet, fra en lille Handelsplads ved Fjordens Munding. Derud
tager hun hver fjortende Dag for at sælge Havens Produkter: Frugt,
Honning, Syltetøjer og henkogte Grøntsager. Hendes Fader har der en
Forretningsven, som han foretrækker at handle med fremfor med den
gamle Bys Købmænd.

Da hun har fortalt mig alt dette og jeg stadig tier, spørger hun:
»Men hvad vilde De egenlig ved Skibet? Ventede De Nogen?« »Ja,«
svarer jeg, »det gjorde jeg vist. Fra min Barndom af har Skibet
altid bragt mig Nogen, jeg holder af. Og Skibet narrede mig
heller ikke idag.« Og da jeg ser, at mine Ord ikke skræmmer eller
forstemmer hende, fortsætter jeg: »Men nu De? Tænkte De, da De
stirrede mod Land, at blive modtagen af Nogen?« Hun siger: »Jeg
stod inde i Taagen og tænkte paa Dem, saadan som De var den første
Gang, jeg mødte Dem. Og saa saa' jeg Dem paa den anden Side Taagen.«
Uvilkaarligt griber jeg hendes Haand, og hun trækker den ikke
tilbage: »Ja, nu er jeg paa den anden Side Taagen.«

Men lidt efter, da vi skilles, siger hun: »Kommer De saa op til
Møllen? Vi venter Dem.«




XV.


                             _Natten mellem 1ste og 2den August._

I to Dage tøvede jeg med at følge Indbydelsen. Jeg tænkte: hun har
sagtens ikke ment, Du skulde komme ligestraks. Men iaften maatte jeg
derop. Da jeg kom, stod Grethe i Døren: »Naa, endelig!« sagde hun.
»Fader begyndte allerede at drille mig med, at De nok helst var fri
for vort Selskab.« Saa vidste jeg, at jeg var velkommen og kunde
straks føle mig tryg og vel til Mode.

Møllerens Dagligstue, gennem hvis Vinduer man har Udsigt over
Fjorden, ligner en Kahyt, lavloftet og dyb, med en lang gulpoleret
Hestehaarssofa, et stort Klapbord, læderbetrukne Stole, Søkort og
Billeder af Skibe paa Væggen, i et Hjørne en Skibsmodel, i et
andet Hjørne et gammeldags Klaver, paa Hylder og Skabe Konkylier og
udstoppede tropiske Fiske, over Bordet en Svinglampe.

Herind blev jeg ført til Mølleren, hvis brede ranke Kæmpeskikkelse
jeg straks genkendte, men hvis Blik under de buskede graa Bryn
var blegt og udslukt. Han sad i Sofahjørnet i en blaa Pjækkert og
dampede paa en svær Merskumspibe. Grethe førte mig hen til ham
og sagde: »Her er han, den fremmede Herre, kan Du se, han kom
alligevel.« Hans haarede brune Haand trykkede hjærteligt min, og
dermed var jeg hjemme i Møllerens Stue.

Aldrig har jeg nogetsteds følt mig saa hjemme. Jeg sad og tænkte:
har jeg set alt dette før i en Drøm, eller er det en Drøm, som min
Sjæls Længsler fremtryller? Jeg syntes, jeg havde levet mange Aar i
disse ejendommelige Omgivelser, i denne Kahyt, der som et Vrag var
kastet i Land paa et gæstevenligt Bjærg, sammen med denne blinde
Olding, der talte vise Ord, og denne unge Pige, der stille hyggede
og smykkede Eneboerlivet for os.

Jeg lyttede til den Gamles Fortællinger og havde Sjælen jublende
fuld af Grethes Billed. Iført en tarvelig graa Hjemmekjole og et
broget Bondeforklæde syslede hun ud og ind, bragte os skaaret
Smørrebrød og Frugtmost af egen Tilvirkning, stoppede os bagefter
Piber og bryggede os en Toddy af gammel vestindisk Rom. Hver Gang,
hun vendte tilbage, strømmede Solskin ind i Stuen. At den Gamle
ogsaa fornam det, saa' jeg paa de Glimt af Liv, hendes Indtræden
altid tændte i hans Øjne.

Da Grethe var ude at tilberede Aftensmaden, fortalte Mølleren:

»Før jeg faldt til Ro heroppe, foer jeg vidt omkring. Jeg førte
Skibe paa de store Have, baade for egen og andres Regning. Men en
skønne Dag syntes jeg, det kunde være nok. Jeg havde set mere end
jeg brød mig om, Tiderne blev daarlige for Sejlskibene, jeg mente
ikke, Sejladsen førte til ret meget mere. Saa byggede jeg Møllen
her. En Mølle er dog et Slags Skib, den bruger baade Vind og Sejl
for at male i Posen, og tillige maler den langt sikrere. De andre
Møllere paa Egnen korsede sig over den ny Møller, der førte sin
Mølle som en Skude og lod staa til selv i den stærkeste Storm.
Efterhaanden havde min Mølle malet saameget, som jeg og min Datter
behøvede. Jeg var gammel, mit Syn ødelagt af den skarpe Blæst og
det hvirvlende Melstøv. Og saa bliver man saa træt af saadan en
Mølle, der evigt støjer og altid svinger rundt paa samme Plet. Jeg
var træt, trængte til at lade Møllen hvile og faa Stilhed omkring
mig. Deri er jo intet underligt. De, der dog ikke er nogen gammel
Mand, har nok haft noget af samme Fornemmelse, efter hvad Grethe har
fortalt mig.

Mærkeligere er det med Grethe. Hun er ligesom Barn af Stilheden
heroppe, hun kan ikke slippe den, saa ung hun er. Hvis De tror, det
er mig, som øver Pres paa hende for at faa hende til at sidde og
kukkelure sammen med mig, tager De Fejl. Jeg har ofte nok foreslaaet
hende, at hun skulde se sig om i Verden. Jeg har endogsaa tilbudt
hende at flytte med hende et Aarstid til Hovedstaden. Hun vil ikke
bort herfra. Her synes hun, hun har alt det, der gør hende glad. For
det derude føler hun kun Frygt og Uvilje. Det er ikke kommet med
Alderen, gennem Læsning af alle de utilfredse moderne Bøger, som man
kunde formode. Hun er født med det. Da hun var en lille Pige, tænkte
jeg at skulle gøre hende en Fornøjelse ved at skikke hende paa et
Besøg over til hendes Moders Slægtninge i Hovedstaden. Hun blev
artigt sin Tid ud; men da hun kom tilbage, tog hun det Løfte af mig,
at jeg aldrig mere maatte sende hende bort. Familjen havde været god
nok imod hende og gjort alt for at adsprede hende. Men hun længtes
kun efter Vejrbakken, hun var bleven bleg af at længes og føle sig
ene.«

Den Gamle standsede og sad en Stund fordybet i Tanker. Saa tilføjede
han: »Naa, en Gang maa hun vel bort herfra -- naar jeg er død.
Medmindre hun faar en Mand, der kan finde sig i at blive her hos
hende. Men Vejrbakken er just ikke frodig paa unge Mænd, og, saavidt
jeg kan skønne, har Grethe hellerikke været videre befængt med
Giftetanker. Ogsaa i det Stykke er hun anderledes end unge Piger
flest, endda hun har læst nok af Romaner om Elskov og Sværmeri.«

-- -- Jeg blev længe siddende i Møllerens Stue. Da Mørket faldt paa,
tændte Grethe Lampen og satte sig til Klaveret. I det aabne Vindu
tegnede sig Omridset af den hvilende Mølle paa Baggrund af den blege
Sommerhimmel. Og ud i Stilheden bares til Klaverets spinkle, sprøde
Toner Grethes simple, rørende Sang.

Men i Sofahjørnet slumrede den gamle Møller, med Lampelysets bløde
Skær over det mildt smilende Ansigt.




XVI.


                                                    _15. August._

Hvad mon Verden for Tiden foretager sig? Var den store Krig
eller den store Revolution brudt løs, havde Rygtet vel været saa
højrøstet, at det var naaet mig. Nu da ingen Rygter forstyrrer min
avisløse Tilværelse, tør jeg sikkert slutte, at Begivenhederne ikke
er overvældende. Fra det hjemlige Marked indskrænker Noteringerne
sig formodenlig til det sædvanlige Antal Forlovelser og Skandaler,
den sædvanlige politiske Suppe paa en Pølsepind, der næppe en Gang
har Lugten af Kødmad tilbage, en Smule Teatervrøvl i Anledning af
den tilstundende Sæson og Forkyndelsen af et Par Snese nye Bøger,
hvoraf de tre Fjerdedele vil være glemte samme Dag, de udkommer
-- fordi de handler om alt muligt andet end det, der ligger baade
Forfatteren og hans Læsere paa Sinde, eller fordi Forfatteren ikke
har noget paa Sinde, der kan interessere Andre end ham selv og hans
nærmeste Paarørende.

Det er Betænkeligheder af den sidste Art, der faar mig til at tøve
med min Bog om den gamle By. Den ene Dag finder jeg Emnet altfor
ringe og ubetydende, frygter, at Folk med Foragt skal vende sig fra
min Bog, sigende: hvad vedkommer dette os? Men næste Dag, naar jeg
vaagner i svulmende Lykke over al den Skønhed af gamle Minder og nye
Indtryk, hvori jeg lever, genfødes Forvisningen om, at min Bog ogsaa
maa kunne bringe Bud til andre Hjærter, der har følt og drømt de
samme Længsler som mit.

Saaledes gaar Arbejdet langsomt og rykvis under de skiftende
Stemninger. Eller tøver jeg af den Grund, at de nye Oplevelser væver
ind i de gamle Minder en Roman, som endnu kun er i sin Vorden; hvis
Afslutning jeg ialfald ikke kender?

Hæmmes jeg maaske ogsaa af en vis fejg Angst for de Venner og
Veninder, jeg har forladt? Faar de skeptiske Smil, hvormed jeg
forudser, at de vil læse om min Pilgrimsfærd til Barndommens hellige
Land, undertiden min Haand til at standse? Er jeg selv her i min
sikre Ensomhed, borte fra alle Rygter og alle Randgloser, under
Selskabets Trældomsfrygt?

Jeg betroede mig iaften til Grethe, mens vi gik vor Aftentur paa
Møllebakken. Da jeg havde endt mit Skriftemaal, sagde hun, varsomt
og med sænket Hoved, ligesom hun vilde undskylde, at hun udtalte
sin Mening: »Efter hvad jeg kender til Literatur -- jeg har før
læst ikke saa lidt -- og saavidt jeg kan dømme, er Frygt for at
tale rent ud, Frygt for at give sig helt hen, Mangelen hos næsten
alle Forfattere. Jeg har den Fornemmelse, naar jeg læser en Bog, at
Forfatteren, selv hvor han foregiver Aabenhjærtighed, altid skeler
til Læsernes Domstol, altid er betænkt paa sin Værdighed, altid
pynter og pudser sig lidt, for at Ingen skal tage Anledning til
Forargelse eller Spot. Bryder De Dem om mit Raad, der maaske lyder
anmassende, saa skriv, som om De ikke havde andet Publikum end mig,
der er en uvidende Pige og ikke klog nok til hverken at spotte eller
forarges.«

Vi var standsede, vi saa' Fjorden og Byen dybt under os:

»Eller skriv,« sagde hun, »som den, der boer paa Vejrbakken.«




XVII.


                                                    _23. August._

Jeg har opdaget, at Grethe i Grunden slet ikke kender den gamle
By, og jeg har bedt hende, om jeg maatte vise hende den. Jeg vilde
saa gærne, at hun skulde lære at holde af den, saadan som jeg gør.
Fordi hun forstod, at det vilde glæde mig, modtog hun mit Tilbud.
Hun synes ogsaa at interessere sig for, hvad jeg viser og fortæller
hende, men mest morer det hende vist at se min Iver som den gamle
Bys Fremfører.

Idag viste jeg hende Slottet.

Slottet, der ligger nede ved Fjorden og gør Tjeneste som
Amtmandsbolig, er en lang graa pakhuslignende Bygning med et Utal af
smaarudede Vinduer i to Etager. Kun den Række af gamle Poppeltræer,
der paraderer foran det, og den rødkappede Skildvagt, der vandrer
frem og tilbage mellem Poplerne, kendetegner det som et fremragende
Hus. Som det nu fremtræder, er Slottet hverken særlig gammelt eller
paa nogen Maade mærkeligt. Det har kun sparsomme Rester fra den Tid,
det var et virkeligt Slot og Sæde for Kongens Lensmand.

Det er henimod Skumring, da jeg med Grethe vandrer gennem den dybe
skumle Port i Forhuset ind i den store firkantede Slotsgaard,
der omsluttes af lave hvide Længer. Græsset gror frodigt mellem
Gaardens Brostene, langs Længerne staar paa fornem Herregaardsvis
smaa kuppelklippede Linde. Ved Foden af Træerne løber, hele Gaarden
rundt, en Rendesten saa dyb og bred som en lille Bæk, med talrige
Gangbrædter over.

Vi sidder paa en Bænk under Lindene ved Længen lige over for
Porten, hvor Vandet fra Rendestenene samler sig og forsvinder i en
underjordisk Afløbskanal ned til Fjorden. Og mens Solen daler i
Bakkerne Nordvest for Byen og sender sine sidste Straaler paa Skraa
gennem Porten ind over Gaardens Græs, fortæller jeg Grethe om den
strænge Hr. Esben, der for mange Aarhundreder siden raadede her paa
Slottet, navnkundig ikke mindre som Kvindebedaarer end som Kriger.
Til Sikkerhed i Ufredstider var af hans Forgængere bygget en Løngang
fra Slottets Kælder til Volden paa den anden Side Fjorden. Hr. Esben
benyttede dog Løngangen mest til sine galante Æventyr. Han havde et
vennesælt, nedladende Væsen, samme Herre. Ofte bød han en Borger
med hans unge Kone eller Fæstemø til Gilde paa Slottet. Men naar
Borgermanden var drukken ganske sanseløs, lokkede han den unge Kone
ud af Salen, lod hende, om hun gjorde Modstand, kneble og førte
hende gennem Løngangen under Fjorden til et lidet Hus med vellystige
Kammerser, hvor Gildet saa fortsattes, den Bortførte oftest ej til
Ubehag, saasom Hr. Esben var saare skøn og gavmild; den narrede Mand
eller Elsker til megen Fortrædelighed, naar han vaagnede af sin Rus
og fandt Fuglen fløjet. Dog saa' han sin Fordel i at tie, holde gode
Miner til slet Spil og bide Skammen i sig. For Hr. Esben var kendt
som en nidkær Herre med en haard Haand. Desuden var der jo ingen
Anledning til at udbasunere over den ganske Stad den Tort, der var
bleven Ens Kæreste til Del, især naar man ikke kunde være saa sikker
paa, hvor god eller hvor daarlig hendes Vilje havde været. Et og
andet sivede dog ud gennem forblommede Ord, et og andet kunde anes
ved pludseligt brudte Trolovelser og Ufred mellem Ægtefæller, der
før havde levet i god Enighed. En Sky af hemmelig Angst og hviskende
Had lagde sig efterhaanden mellem Byen og Slottet.

Wu Yajun, 46, is general director of Longhu Real Estate Development Co, a developer in the southwestern municipality of Chongqing. Wu ranks as the second wealthiest woman in the world, with an estimated personal fortune of 28 billion yuan.

Saa hændte det, at Hr. Esben kastede sine Øjne paa Borgmesterens
dejlige 17 Aars Datter, nygift med en af Byens raskeste og dygtigste
unge Haandværkere, Klaus Bryde. Hr. Esben smægtede og smiskede en
Stund med dristige Blik og lønlige Tegn, naar han red forbi den
unge Kones Vindue. Og da han havde forstaaet, at hun ikke tog ham
hans Hyldest ilde op, greb han den først mulige Anledning til at
byde Klaus Bryde og Kone være Gæster paa Slottet. Klaus Bryde havde
imidlertid lugtet Lunten. Han drak sig fuld kun paa Skrømt. Alt mens
hans Hoved sank dybere paa Brystet, iagttog han de ømme Blikke, der
veksledes mellem hans Kone og Lensmanden. Og ikke saasnart var de
to forsvundne ud af Salen, hvor de troede Ægtemanden hvilende i en
salig Rus, før Klaus Bryde rejste sig, gik hen til et af Slottets
Vinduer og gav en lille Skare udenfor ventende Venner et aftalt
Tegn. Med Vaaben i Haand trængte de sig ind i Slottet, overmandede
og kneblede den intet anende Vagt, fandt, anførte af Klaus Bryde,
den aabne Dør til Løngangen, saa' i det Fjærne det blege Lys af
døende Fakler og ilede ind i Mørket ... -- Om det Drama, der er
udspillet paa Fjordens Dyb, beretter Sagnet følgende: Da Slottets
Folk den næste Morgen, opskræmte af den omsider befriede Vagts
Fortælling, kom til, var Løngangens Dør smækket i Laas. Det varede
en rum Stund, inden den svære Jærndør sprængtes, og i det samme, den
aabnedes, saa' man de uskadte Lig af tre af Klaus Brydes Venner.
Efter en haabløs Kamp for at sprænge Døren var de kvalte. Længere
inde i Gangen fandtes flere Lig af Kvalte, midtvejs Lensmanden, den
unge Kone, Klaus Bryde, de to Fakkelsvende og et Par Andre, alle
skrækkeligt lemlæstede. -- Siden hed det sig, at en Fisker, der hin
Nat havde stanget Aal paa Fjorden ligeover Løngangen, mente at have
hørt Vaabenraslen nede fra Dybet.

       *       *       *       *       *

... Solen er gaaet ned. Den graa Skumring er falden over den stille
Slotsgaard. Da lyder et dumpt Pjask i Vandet lige bag os og Grethe
griber mig i Armen. »Hvad var det?« spørger hun. »Se selv,« svarer
jeg og peger paa Gangbrædtet:

»De gamle Slots-Rotters Time er inde. De drager deres Spøgelse-Færd
fra Slottet ned til Fjorden. Se, snart svømmer de og snart
entrer de over Brædtet. Sid bare roligt, de følger deres vante
Vej, herop kommer de ikke. Det er en hel Karavane, de skal ned at
se til den gamle Løngang, vaage over, at Ingen forstyrrer dens
hemmelighedsfulde Hvile i Sagnets Mørke.«

»Hvad har Rotterne med Løngangen at bestille?« spørger Grethe.

»Kom, saa skal De høre!«

Jeg fører hende hen til en Kælderluge i et Hjørne af Gaarden. Gennem
Lugen, som jeg aabner, ser vi ned i nogle mørke murede Hvælvinger,
hvorfra en klam indelukket Gravkammer-Luft slaar os i Møde.

Og jeg fortæller: »Da disse Krypt-Hvælvinger -- vi gaar ikke
derned; thi paa dette Tidspunkt er der næppe ganske hyggeligt --
udgravedes i forrige Aarhundrede, paastaar man, at Løngangen, som
man troede forlængst forsvunden, om den overhovedet nogensinde
havde eksisteret, genfandtes. En af Arbejderne tilbød at gaa
derind; spændt afventede man Resultatet: man hørte hans Skridt og
hans muntre Sang fjærne sig, det var tydeligt, at han naaede frem.
Saa blev alt stille. Man ventede og ventede, men han kom aldrig
tilbage. Byens Øvrighed lovede da en Straffefange Friheden, om han
vilde forny Forsøget. Det var en forsoren Galgenfugl, der frygtede
hverken Gud eller Fanden. Han slog til. En Tov blev bundet ham om
Livet: saasnart der var Fare paa Færde, skulde han trække til.
Karlen gik rask ned og forsvandt. Paa Tovet, der droges efter ham,
kunde man skønne, at han fandt aaben Vej adskillige Favne. Pludselig
standsede Tovet, uden at der dog rykkedes i det. Man tænkte, han var
stødt paa en eller anden Hindring, som han var ifærd med at rydde.
Standsningen blev imidlertid uhyggelig langvarig. Maaske Manden var
besvimet. Og man halede ind i Tovet: det kom tilbage uden Byrde; det
var gnavet over -- af Rotterne, som havde beholdt Karlen ... Men
endnu ses i Hvælvingen en rusten Jærndør og indenfor den et Par
murede Trin, som fører nedad.«

-- -- Vi stod atter udenfor, hvor de gamle Popler og Skildvagten
i sin røde Kappe paraderer. Smilende saa' Grethe paa Slottet og
sagde: »Hvem skulde nu tro, at den grimme, kedelige Bygning kunde
forskrække Nogen! Og dog var jeg ikke rigtig hyggelig til Mode før.«

»Ja,« svarede jeg, »saadan gaar det med hele den gamle By. For
den, der haster den ligegyldig igennem, er den kun en almindelig,
hverdagsagtig Provinsby. Men for den, der oplader den sit Hjærte,
aabenbarer den en Skat af fin Poesi og sære Sagn.«




XVIII.


                                                  _3. September._

Vi har inat haft den første Efteraarsstorm. Jeg laa i Sengen og
lyttede til den.

Oppe fra Skoven kommer et Vindstød susende, rusker i Pavillonens
Træværk, saa det knager i alle Fuger, og bulrer videre ned over
Bakken til Byen. Stød følger paa Stød, om og om igen den samme
Leg, stadig vildere, stadig voldsommere. Træerne sukker, gisper og
stønner. Stormen giver ikke Pardon. Hvad der ikke har Kraft at staa,
faar falde.

Stormen, den store Opriver og Forskrækker, raser udenom mig. Jeg
kender ingen Angst, jeg ler den op i Ansigtet: Du skræmmer mig ikke,
Du naaer mig ikke, Du havde din Klo i mig, men jeg undslap Dig.

Og i lykkeligt Overmod velsigner jeg Stormen. Den blæser Efteraaret
ind, den dejlige Tid, hvor der bliver endnu mere stille paa
Vejrbakken; den Tid, hvor Vejrbakken vil tilhøre kun Grethe og mig.

Iaftes, da jeg forlod Møllerhuset og hun fulgte mig til Dørs,
sagde hun: »Ser De, nu er Himlen fuld af Efteraar. Nu drager Syden
Trækfuglene, nu længes Hovedstadsfolk bort fra de stille Steder.
Begynder ikke ogsaa De at længes?«

»Og hvis jeg rejste,« spurgte jeg, »vilde De føle det som et Savn?«

Hendes Øjne duggedes, mens de saa' ind i mine og hun svarede: »Jeg
synes, det maa være saa forfærdeligt at skulle sige Farvel. Hvis De
rejser, saa lov mig, at De gør det uden Afsked.«

»Jeg rejser ikke, før _De_ siger Farvel.«

Og jeg skyndte mig bort i det frembrydende Uvejr, men da jeg, henne
ved Skoven, vendte mig, stod hun endnu i Døren og saa' efter mig.


                                                  _7. September._

Hvorfor siger jeg hende ikke, at jeg elsker hende? Er det af Frygt
for, at det skulde bedrøve eller mishage hende? Visselig ikke. Af
tusind Smaating har hun forstaaet, hvor kær og dyrebar hun er mig;
for hver Dag ser hun, uden at jeg behøver at sige det, hvordan min
Kærlighed tager Vækst. Hun sér det, med Smil i sit Blik, med fagre
Roser paa Kind.

Jeg taler ikke, fordi jeg ikke nænner at forstyrre vore Sjæles Møde
i den trygge Ventens Tysthed. Fordi jeg føler mig til Mode, som sad
vi Haand i Haand og lyttede til en dæmpet Sang ude over Vandet en
yndig Skærsommernat.




XIX.


                                       _Slutningen af September._

Det er Frugthøstens Tid. I Møllerens Have gaar Arbejdet muntert og
travlt.

Paa den lille Plæne mellem alle de bugnende Træer, midt i
Travlheden, sidder Mølleren i en Lænestol og leder, trods sin
Blindhed, Arbejdet. Han kender alle Træer i Haven og udpeger dem
i den Rækkefølge, de skal høstes; han giver Ordre om, hvordan
Plukningen for hvert enkelt Træs Vedkommende skal foregaa, og
han modtager Kurvene, efterhaanden som de fyldes, til kyndig
Undersøgelse og Prøvelse.

Grethe fører Tilsyn med Plukningen, hvortil er lejede et Par Piger
og Karle; hun tager selv Del i Arbejdet og hun sætter ogsaa mig i
Beskæftigelse. Hun og jeg besørger de fine Frugter, der vokser paa
glasdækkede Espalierer og som maa behandles med særlig Varsomhed.
Jeg staar paa en Stige og plukker dem, hun nedenfor med udbredt
Forklæde. Men ofte maa hun skænde paa mig for min Dovenskab; thi
det hænder hvert Øjeblik, naar jeg skal række hende Frugten, at jeg
fortaber mig i Beskuelsen af hendes ivrigt blussende Ansigt, der
er skønnere end nogen Frugt. Og hvad hjælper det, hun skænder? Hun
bliver kun dobbelt sød i sin skrømtede Utaalmodighed.

-- -- -- Naar Duggen begynder at falde, standses Plukningen og
Kurvene bæres ind i Frugtkamrene, der har Hylder fra Gulv til Loft,
og hvor Grethe forestaar Sorteringens vigtige og vanskelige Arbejde:
hvad der tør sendes til Hovedstadens kræsne, men højtbetalende
Frugthandlere, hvad Prangerne kan faa overladt til en billig Penge,
hvad der egner sig til Syltning og Henkogning og hvad endelig der
skal forbeholdes Husets Vinterforbrug.

Som der dufter her i disse Frugtkamre. Alle de syrlige og søde Aande
fra Kurve og Hylder fortættes i de indelukkede Rum og blander sig
til en berusende Essens, der længe hænger i Ens Klæder.

Og saa prægtig Grethe ser ud, som hun, med Kjoleærmerne smøgede op
om de hvide stærke Arme, tager i de solbrændte Hænder Frugt paa
Frugt og med hastig Kendermine tildeler hver sin Plads og Rang.

Helst tænker jeg dog paa hende, som jeg saa' hende nedenfor Stigen
ved Espalieret. Hvis jeg skrev Vers, vilde jeg sætte Billedet i Digt:

»Det er Frugthøstens Tid. I Møllerens Have paa den golde Vejrbakke
modnes den ædleste Frugt i Landet. I Møllerens Have staar hans
Datter, den højbarmede Mø, med Favnen fuld af svulmende Druer.«




XX.


                                                       _Oktober._

I Kildehaven, der ligger mellem Byen og Vejrbakken, har de smaa
Børn deres Park. Naar Vejret er godt, føres de, kørende i deres
Vugge-Kareter eller trippende paa deres stumpede Ben, herud af
Mødre, Ammer og Barnepiger. En stor Runddel, skærmet af store
Træer og omgiven af lange Bænke, er Samlingsstedet. Her findes en
Træbod, hvorfra sælges Mælk og Smaakager, Lakris, Johannesbrød og
fristende rødstribede Brystsukkerstænger. Men midt paa Pladsen staar
en broncebarsk Statue af en fædrelandsk Helt og ser med uanfægtet
Krigeriskhed paa Børnenes Leg.

Paa vor Vej til Byen gaar Grethe og jeg gærne gennem Kildehaven. For
mig er det en Opfriskelse af mine spædeste Minder, fra den Gang
jeg var et saa bevægeligt Gemyt, at jeg i Arrigskab rakte Tunge ad
Blæsten og græd af Angst, naar min Barnepige, efter den almindelige
respektløse Sædvane i Kildehaven, lod mig forrette mine nødtørftige
Smaaærinder ved Foden af den strænge General. Først og fremmest
nyder jeg dog Grethes Henrykkelse over de Smaa. Med straalende
Øjne følger hun deres yndefuldt-kejtede Tumlen og finder dem lige
bedaarende, enten de leende pludrer eller pludselig stikker i en
fortvivlet Brølen. Men allermest elsker hun de ganske Smaa, dem,
der ligger i Vognene og kigger ud i Verden med store forundrede
Øjne. Det hændte idag, at vi saa' en ung Moder tage saadan En op af
Puderne og lægge den til sit store hvide Bryst, som den sugede sig
fast til med graadig Mund og greb om med smaa ivrige Hænder. Med øm,
andagtsfuld Tilbedelse fortabte Grethes Blik sig i dette Billede, og
da hun endelig rev sig løs og vi gik bort, saa' jeg, at hun havde
Taarer i Øjnene.

-- -- Vi talte siden om hendes Kærlighed til Børn. Hun sagde:

»Mit højeste Ønske er at blive Moder til mange Børn og bo paa
Vejrbakken, hvor der er Plads til at tumle med dem. Jeg kunde ikke
forestille mig at være gift, selv om jeg elskede min Mand aldrig
saa højt, uden at have Børn. Kan noget tænkes skønnere for en
Kvinde end at give den Mand, hun elsker, Børn? Kan noget tænkes
dejligere end at blive kaldt Moder? Vide og føle, ja høre paa den
Klang, hvormed Ordet bliver sagt, at man ikke lever forgæves,
men at der er Nogen, som saa nødvendigt trænger til En? Min Mand
skulde intet tabe ved den Ømhed, jeg ofrede vore Børn. Jeg vilde
elske ham dobbelt som deres Fader. Men fordi jeg føler det saadan,
forstaar jeg ikke, ja forskrækkes af de unge Kvinder, hvorom jeg
læser i moderne Bøger. Det er jo næsten, som de frygtede Børn
som en Fare for deres Lykke. Og ikke nok med det. De klynker og
jamrer ovenikøbet over den Naturens Grusomhed, der lader dem føde i
Smerte. Som om ikke de fik tifold Vederlag for selv den pinefuldeste
Kvide, naar de holder Barnet i deres Arme. Som om overhovedet det
at blive Moder var noget værd, naar det ikke kostede Smerte! --
Jeg tænkte først: det er Mændene, der i blødagtig Medynk skriver
saa taabeligt om noget, de ikke forstaar. Men jeg læste siden det
samme i langt stærkere Ord i Bøger, skrevne af Kvinder, som hævder
at tale Kvindernes Sag. Disse kvindelige Forfattere, Hustruer og
Mødre ofte, er ligefrem fornærmede over, at alene Kvinden skal være
Moder og at Moderpligterne afholder dem fra Deltagelse i vigtigere
Samfundsopgaver. Jeg forstaar ikke de Kvinder, jeg forfærdes over
dem. Jeg ser dem for mig med Ansigter fortrukne af Oprør mod
Naturen. Jeg bliver syg af at læse deres Bøger. Jeg føler det, som
om der blev myrdet smaa Børn inde i mig.«

Men, efter en Pavse, tilføjede Grethe: »Ser De, jeg tror nok, det
har gjort meget, at jeg mistede min Moder saa tidligt. Al den
utilfredsstillede Trang, jeg havde til Moder-Ømhed, har givet min
Moder-Trang Vækst. Jeg, der ikke mindes, hvordan det er at sidde paa
Mo'rs Skød, kunde alt som lille Pige ikke se et Barn, uden at mine
Arme længtes efter at favne det og lægge det op til mig.«

Saaledes talte den Moderløse til den Moderløse. Og mens jeg saa'
paa hendes frodige Legeme, dér hun gik stolt og ren i sin frimodige
Bekendelse, tænkte jeg, at bedre Lykke kunde jeg ikke give min Søn
end at lade ham fødes af denne Kvinde.




XXI.


                                                       _Oktober._

Vi standser foran et langt lavt skiddengult Hus i en snæver
Sidegyde. I hvert af Vinduerne, der ligger nær Jorden, sidder bag
Geranier og Gyldenlakker en gammel Kvinde med et kulørt strikket
Tørklæde om Skuldrene.

»I dette Hus -- fortæller jeg Grethe -- bor saadanne gamle fattige
Kvinder, der ikke er fine nok til at komme i Stiftelsen. Huset
bestaar af en eneste lang Stue, afdelt ved Sirtses-Forhæng i tyve
Rum, ti paa hver Side. I hver Baas bor en gammel Kvinde. I min
Barndom hed en af dem Ane Marie. Hun er den eneste, hvem jeg har
arvet.

Ane Marie var en brystsvag Sypige. Hvor gammel hun var, véd jeg
ikke; uden Tvivl dog temmelig til Aars, siden hun havde faaet Plads
i de veldædige Baase. Hun bevarede imidlertid saa sent, jeg husker
hende, et fuldstændigt Barneansigt, glat og fint med to troskyldige,
altid smilende brune Øjne. Af Person var hun det klejneste, jeg har
sét. Hun listede som en lille beskeden Skygge ned ad Gaden med sin
Bondehue paa Hovedet og det grønne uldne Sjal viklet om de spinkle
Skuldre. Her i Huset havde hun frit Logis, men forresten maatte hun
ernære sig selv. Det gjorde hun ved at sy hos Folk i Byen, hun havde
sin Dag hver Uge hos seks Familjer. Nogen vidtdreven Færdighed i
Sykunsten besad Ane Marie ikke. Men at lappe og stoppe forstod hun
som ingen anden; der var aldrig et Stykke Linned eller Uldtøj saa
laset, at hun ikke fandt det for godt til at kasseres. De barnrige
Familjer, der ydede hende hendes Underhold, var da ikke narrede med
hende, navnlig da hun ikke kunde beskyldes for at trække dem op.
Hendes Gage, den hun bestemt afslog at faa forhøjet -- hun fandt
den i alle Maader rundelig -- var seks Skilling pr. Dag. Men saa
havde hun jo rigtignok tillige det meste af Kosten. Og med Hensyn
til Kosten blev der kræset for Ane Marie, hvor hun kom. Familjerne
sørgede altid for at have hendes Livretter til hende, hvad der
ejheller var økonomisk uoverkommeligt for Husmoderen og gjorde
hendes Besøg dobbelt kært for os Børn; thi Ane Marie havde ogsaa
i sin Smag bevaret en afgjort Barnlighed. Skulde hun have nævnet
den Diner, der mest fristede hende, vilde hun uden Betænkning have
svaret: Sødsuppe og Pandekager. Fra min tidligste Barndom, til vi
rejste fra Byen, kom Ane Marie hver Torsdag hjemme hos os. Lignede
hun paa Gaden en Skygge, blev hun i Stuen en mild lille Solstraale.
Hun var altid fornøjet, altid opfyldt af, hvor godt hun havde det og
hvor gode Folk var imod hende, smilede altid taknemmeligt ud af sine
brune Barneøjne. Men meddelsom blev hun først, naar hun var alene
med os Børn. De Voksne skræmmede hende en Smule med deres Fornuft
og Alvor. Sammen med Børn følte hun sig i sit Es. Deres smaa Sorger
og Glæder forstod hun, som det var hendes egne. Deres Forestillinger
og Interesser var ogsaa hendes. Hele Eftermiddagen, naar vi var
komne fra Skole, sad vi inde hos hende i den lille Strygestue og
passiarede lunt og godt som med en jævnaldrende Kammerat. -- Men da
Afskedens Stund oprandt og vi rejste fra Byen, stod hun ved Skibet
og græd, som skulde hendes Hjærte briste.

Hun glemte ikke sine smaa Venner.

Aarene gik, jeg var allerede en stor Dreng med første Del af Artium,
da der, just som Eksamen var overstaaet, kom Brev om, at Ane Marie,
hvem jeg i Barndommens Letsindighed ikke ofte havde skænket nogen
mindende Tanke, var død og havde indsat mig og en Broder samt to
Børn i en anden Familje til sine Arvinger. Den efterladte Kapital
var 50 Rigsdaler til lige Deling, 12½ Daler til hver Arving.
50 Rigsdaler, det vilde for Ane Marie sige 800 Arbejdsdages
Fortjeneste samlet sammen, Seksskilling paa Seksskilling.

Jeg rejste min Arv op. For Ane Maries Seksskillinger gjorde jeg en
dejlig fjorten Dages Fodtur efter den overstandne Eksamen.

-- -- Og derfor, Grethe, kommer Taarer mig i Øjnene, naar jeg ser
paa dette fattige Hus, hvor der sidder gamle Kvinder i Vinduerne bag
Geranier og Gyldenlakker.«




XXII.


                                                      _November._

Min Veninde i Stiftelsen er Grethes og min eneste Omgang. Vi
havde hende for nogen Tid siden til Chokoladegilde paa min
Vejrbakke-Kvist. Hun blev hentet i Droske, fik Flødeskum paa
Chokoladen og, da hun atter steg ind i sin Ekvipage, en Kurv med
Æbler og Pærer samt nogle smaa Glas Syltetøj, som Grethe havde bragt
med til hende. Hun blev kort sagt, som hun selv sagde, behandlet
akkurat som en Prinsesse i et af de Æventyr, hun digtede til mig, da
jeg var Barn.

Men ogsaa vi har besøgt hende og været hendes fejrede Gæster.

Grethe har ganske erobret min Veninde, der vist vilde have
Vanskelighed ved at afgøre, for hvem af os, Grethe eller mig, hendes
gamle Hjærte banker stærkest. Det forvirrer og ærgrer hende lidt,
at vi ikke er forlovede; men hun har aabenbart ikke opgivet Haabet
om, at det kan komme. Naar vi besøger hende, trækker hun snart mig,
snart Grethe afsides og fortaber sig i blomstrende Lovprisninger:
af Grethe overfor mig og omvendt. Til mig er det stadige Omkvæd:
»Er hun nu ikke yndig? Har han nogensinde set Mage til gudvelsignet
Pigebarn? Blusser hun ikke af lutterste Hjærtensgodhed? Og sikke
Øjnene skinner, naar hun ser paa ham! Ja, det kan da Enhver opdage
med et vindt Øje, at hun har en Klat tilovers for ham.«

-- -- Igaar var vi til stor Kaffestads hos hende. Til hendes Sorg
fik hun ikke Lov at invitere Præsten, hun maatte indskrænke sig til
at hædre os med nogle af Stiftelsens fornemste Damer; men forøvrigt
forløb Festen paa bedste Maade. Beværtningen var kongelig:
Kaffekedlen gik ikke af Kog og Tallerkenen med Wienerbrød tømtes
aldrig saasnart, før den fyldtes igen. Og Samtalen kunde ikke være
livligere. I samme Nu, den ene Dame afsluttede Beretningen om sine
Skrøbeligheder og Genvordigheder, tog den næste fat. Tilsidst vilde
min Veninde absolut lægge Kabaler for mig og Grethe, de andre gamle
Damer brændte af Iver efter at overvære den spændende Forestilling;
men Grethe, der kendte Kabalens Hensigt og af tidligere Erfaring
vidste, at min Veninde altid lod den »pusle i Hjærtersiden«
med »lønlige Bud« og en »sukkende Ven« og alt andet til Faget
henhørende, ønskede, tydeligt nok, at blive forskaanet i dette
større Selskab af Kirsten Gifteknive.

Med et taknemmeligt Blik modtog hun derfor mit Forslag om, at vi
skulde lade Kabalen hvile til en anden Dag og at hun istedetfor
skulde ende Festen med at synge nogle af sine Smaasange nede i
Spindestuen for alle de Gamle.

-- -- I Spindestuen har de Gamle deres Rokke, og mens Rokkehjulene
snurrer, gaar Passiaren rapt om Stiftelsens Anliggender. Men
Spindestuen gør tillige Tjeneste som Bedesal. Som Følge deraf er den
udstyret med et Harmonium.

Der er gaaet Bud ud om den forestaaende Begivenhed, og da vi træder
ind i Spindestuen, anførte af min Veninde, der føler sig mindst som
Direktrice for det store Operateater, er Salen fuld. Med hastigt
anlagte Søndagskapper sidder de gamle Kvinder og virrer saa benauet
og andægtigt, som om de skulde til Alters. Rank og frodig, i lys og
fager Ungdom staar Grethe midt blandt dem: et skinnende Birketræ,
der er skudt op i et udgaaende Krats forvitrede og forkrøblede
Rester. Men alle de rynkede og indfaldne Gamle fornemmer, da de ser
hende, et Genskin af Vaar i deres Hjærter, og i beundrende Mumlen
bølger de virrende Kappe-Hoveder sammen.

Der bliver atter dødsensstille: Grethe har sat sig ved Harmoniet,
slaar en Melodi an ... saa synger hun. Luften i den lave overfyldte
Sal er tyk og tung. Tonerne risler dugklare gennem den, stiger som
kvidrende Fugle, blinker i muntre Solstraaler, spreder sig med Duft
af Skov og Mark, hvælver et blaanende Højenloft over det fattige Rum
og de gamle Kvinder. Det er de sødt smægtende, fromt skælmske Sange
fra vore Mødres og Bedstemødres unge Dage, Grethe synger. De Gamle
lytter, disse Toner faar længe hvilende Strænge i dem til at bæve,
forsigtigt prøver de sig frem, efterhaanden mimrer alle de gamle
Munde og nikker alle de krusede Kapper i Takt med Grethes Sang.
Viserne om Elskovs Fryd og Elskovs Smerte er dog dem, der finder den
modtageligste Sangbund. For hvert Kys i Lunden paa Pigemunden glider
der et lykkeligt Smil over de rynkede Ansigter; men naar Taaren
rinder paa blege Kinder, staar et halvthundred Par gamle rødrandede
Øjne i Vand.

Jeg sidder længst tilbage i Stuen sammen med min Veninde. Hun, der
ellers ikke fattes Ord, er saa bevæget, at hun ikke kan tale. Men
hun klapper ustandseligt min Haand. Og da Grethe omsider rejser sig
fra Instrumentet og omringes af takkende og haandkyssende og nejende
og velsignende Gamle, siger min Veninde de Ord, som jeg kunde have
kysset hende for: »Aa nej da. Saa lyslevende som hun ligner hans
salig Mo'r.«




XXIII.


                                                      _December._

Jeg gaar med Grethe til min Moders Grav.

Der er vintermørkt paa Kirkegaarden. I den sorte Dødens Have lysner
kun de nøgne hvide Kors. Det har nylig regnet og vi træder lydløst
paa det faldne Løv.

Døden bliver større og mægtigere i sin Vinterdragt. Ved Sommertid
dækkes dens sælsomme Gru af brogede Blomster og smilende Løv. Vi
søger at gøre Døden mild og god med Sommerens rige Offergaver. Men
om Vinteren rejser den sig i sin strænge Majestæt, breder ud sin
Kappe saa sort og fæster sit Benrads-Mærke paa hvert Kirkegaardens
Træ.

Jeg gaar med Grethe over den vintermørke Kirkegaard, og Dødens Gru
forskrækker mig ikke. Jeg gaar i Pagt med Livets gode Herre; jeg
synes, Døden viger, dér vi skrider frem.

Vi sidder ved Graven, og Grethe siger: »Saa ofte De har talt til mig
om Deres Moder, har De aldrig fortalt mig, hvordan hun saa' ud. De
var dog den Gang, hun døde, ikke mindre end at De maa have modtaget
et bestemt Indtryk af hende.«

»Det Billede af min Moder, jeg tydeligst bevarer i min Erindring,
er ikke fra hendes allersidste Leveaar. Det er fra Tiden, før
Sygdom blegnede hende; fra den Tid, hun endnu var ung og smuk eller
syntes mig at være det. Jeg ser hende midt paa en Plæne i en Have
en dejlig Sommerdag. Hun stod mellem os Børn, der legede om hende,
med et let Sjal yndefuldt draperet om Skuldrene. Jeg mindes aldrig
at have set en Kvinde, der kunde bære et Sjal saa smukt. En stor
Havehat indrammede hendes Ansigts fine Oval, og det mørke Haar
laa glat ned over hendes Pande, en Pande saa klar og hvid. Med
straalende Øjne stod hun i sin legende Børneflok. Da pludselig sad
der en Kanariefugl paa hendes Skulder. En flygtende Fugl, der søgte
Hvile hos hende. Tyssende løftede hun Haanden. En Stund blev Fuglen
siddende, strøg saa kælent sit Næb mod hendes Kind og fløj.«

Jeg tager Grethes Haand, der hviler i hendes Skød: »Ja, Grethe,
saadan mindes jeg min Moder. Men vil De vide mere, da spørg vor
gamle Veninde i Stiftelsen. Hun siger, og jeg kan ikke tvivle om, at
hun har Ret, at De er hendes lyslevende Billed.«

Grethe ser op paa mig med store, kærlige Øjne. Og jeg føler hendes
Arme om min Hals og hendes Læber mod mine. Saa staar vi længe, Arm i
Arm, i stille Andagt foran Moders Grav.

-- -- Men da vi gaar hjemad til Vejrbakken, spørger jeg: »Fortæl
mig, hvordan det gik til, at Du kom til at holde af mig?« Hun
svarer: »Jeg forstod, at Du trængte til mig, og fra samme Stund
havde Du mit Hjærte.«

Siden siger hun: »Lov mig, at Du, naar jeg dør, vil begrave mig tæt
ved din Moder. Min egen Moders Grav er paa et fremmed Sted, og jeg
vil ikke langt bort fra Vejrbakken. Jeg vil ogsaa, at Du skal finde
din Moder og mig sammen.« Men da hun ser, at hendes Ord gør mig
sørgmodig, tilføjer hun smilende: »Du taabelige Mand, tror Du, jeg
tænker paa at dø? Jeg har ingensinde velsignet Livet højere end nu.«




XXIV.


                                                      _December._

Altid tilforn, naar jeg opnaaede noget, jeg kaldte en Lykke, og jeg
ransagede mit Hjærte, om Lykken nu ogsaa virkelig boede i det, fandt
jeg i en eller anden Krog det saare Punkt, hvor Tvivlens Orm gnavede
fordulgt bag Blomsterdækket. Og jeg har vidst, at der vilde komme
det Øjeblik, før eller senere, hvor Pragten falmede.

Tvivlen er nøjsom. Et uroligt Blik, et uoverlagt Ord giver den
Næring. Du sidder en Aftenstund med din Elskede. Da pludselig ser Du
hendes Øje sløres af en fremmed Tanke, et fremmed Minde. Du spørger,
og hun svarer med et aandsfraværende Smil et ligegyldigt Ord. Det
er kun et Nu. Hun glemmer det; og Du glemmer det, mens hun holder
Dig i sine Arme. Men naar den ensomme Nat kommer, stiger frem i din
Sjæl Billedet af din Elskede med Øjne som kolde Løgne og med et
Smil, hvis Spot stivner dit Hjærte. Hvad hjælper det saa, at hun den
næste Dag møder Dig mere øm end nogensinde? Du kan tro Dig frelst en
Dag, en Uge, Maaneder. Ormen har sat sin giftige Tunge i din Lykke.
Du er dens Bytte.

Der er dem, som i arm Blindhed slaar sig tiltaals med den kranke
Lykke. Der er andre, som i indbildsk Trods siger: Tryghed dræber
Lykken.

Der er kun én Lykke: at hvile i Lykken. At vide, at Dagen, der
kommer, rinder op med den samme Sol, der svandt igaar. Intet mere at
begære, intet mere at frygte. Ingen Dag at ønske om igen, ingen Dag
at ønske anderledes, fordi hver Dag er éns lykkelig.

Den Lykke, den eneste, er min.

Saagodt som Nogen har jeg jaget den. Har søgt den ude i den Verden,
hvor man gør sin Lykke. Været tidlig oppe og silde ude for at finde
den, har hidset mig op og trættet mig ud i dens Forfølgelse.

Og saa dalede den nedover mig som en stille Sang paa et fjærnt og
stille Sted. Jeg hørte den klinge dæmpet ude fra Vandet en dejlig
Skærsommernat. Jeg turde ikke kalde paa den, jeg frygtede at skræmme
den bort. Jeg aabnede den blot i ydmyg Tro mit Hjærte. Og se, en Dag
sang Lykken derinde.

-- -- Jeg har ransaget mit Hjærte, der skjuler sig ingen Tvivl i
det. Jeg har vaaget ensomme Nætter, ingen Skygge forvanskede Grethes
hulde Billed.

Jeg glider i en hvid Baad nedad en solbeskinnet Flod, og jeg holder
en gylden Frugt, hel og rund, i min Haand.




XXV.


                                                       _Julenat._

Da jeg i Eftermiddag kommer op til Møllen, ser jeg, at der er to
Jule-Gæster foruden mig. Det er Grethes Guddatter, den fireaarige
Asta, og hendes toaarige Broder Carl, Børn af en Fisker nede ved
Fjorden, der i sin Tid var Dreng paa Møllen. De skal for første
Gang til Juletræ. I den Anledning skinner de af nyvasket Pyntethed
og betuttet Artighed. Og da de ser mig, den fremmede Mand, søger de
en forsigtig Dækstilling bag Grethe, der maa hale dem frem og ruske
dem op for at faa dem foreviste i al deres Dejlighed. Dejlige er
de: Asta en livagtig Englebarnsmodel, lige til at sætte i Toppen af
et Juletræ, kælen og indsmigrende, med gul krøllet Top og store
lyseblaa Øjne; Carl en tæt Prop, sømands-mut og mandfolkevigtig og
med brune Øjne, der blinker af lunt Humør.

Julenadveren er endt og vi gaar ind i Havestuen, hvor Træet er
tændt. Grethe har Purken paa Armen og Asta holder hende i Haanden.
Bagefter kommer Mølleren og jeg med vore Piber. Børnene er straks
helt stumme af Forbavselse; med opspilede Øjne stirrer de frem for
sig, mens Grethe dansende fører dem rundt om Træet. Jeg hvisker til
hende: »Jeg tror, Du er den gladeste af Jer tre.« »Ja,« svarer hun,
»tænk at holde Jul med Dig og saadanne to.«

Det varer dog ikke længe, før Børnene frimodigt giver sig hen i
Fryd. Og da de opdager, at Herlighederne paa Træet er Frugter, som
tør plukkes, bliver de rent ellevilde. Tilsidst ruller de rundt paa
Gulvet som to Kattekillinger mellem alle deres Skatte og fylder den
ellers saa stille Stue med klukkende Latter og ivrig Pludren. Indtil
de bliver trætte og søvnige og med bittesmaa glippende Øjne bæres
om til Godnat. Men da Grethe har lagt dem til Sengs, kommer hun ind
og sætter sig i Sofaen mellem sin Fader og mig.

Endnu brænder Lysene paa Træet, og den Gamle siger: »Der maa være
flere Lys iaar. Sidst var der mørkt foran mig, men iaar synes jeg,
jeg skimter et Lysskær.«

»Ja, lille Fa'r«, svarer Grethe og bøjer sit Hoved op til hans
Skulder, »der er ogsaa flere Lys iaar. Sidst var Du og jeg ene. Jeg
vilde ikke for min Skyld tænde de mange Lys. Men denne Juleaften har
Vejrbakken haft Børn og rigtig Julefest. Og saadan vil det være hver
Juleaften herefter, for han her« -- hun tager min Haand og lægger
den i den Gamles -- »han bliver hos os ... hvis Du giver ham og mig
Lov til det.«

Den Gamle kysser Grethe, trykker fast min Haand, og, mens to store
Taarer pibler frem af hans blinde Øjne, siger han: »Gud velsigne
Jer, Børn, og give Jer lyse Dage paa Vejrbakken. Dem, min Søn, har
jeg jo aldrig set, faar Dem aldrig at se. Men paa Deres Stemme,
naar vi talte om Grethe, har jeg hørt, at De holdt af hende.«

-- -- Før jeg gaar, fører Grethe mig ind i sit Sovekammer, hvor
Asta og Carl hviler i hendes gamle Barneseng, slumrende trygt i
hinandens Arme, mens Asta moderligt har lagt den lille Broder op til
sit Bryst. Forsigtigt lister vi os hen og kysser dem. De vaagner
ikke, men smiler, som de i Søvne følte den Kærlighed, der staar ved
deres Leje. Saa kysser Grethe mig og siger: »Tænk, hvor vidunderlig
dejligt, om det var vore egne!«

       *       *       *       *       *

Grethe følger mig ud paa Bakken. Det er den skønneste stjærneklare
Frostnat. Vi staar paa Bakkekammen ud mod Fjorden. Til Højre for os
skraaner den hvide Skov; det er saa stille, at vi hører det, naar en
Kvist knækker i Frosten. Foran, dybt under os, ligger den isdækkede
Fjord og Byen, hvor der skinner Julelys i alle Huse.

»Nu er der Fred paa Jorden,« hvisker Grethe. »Ja, og Fred i
Menneskenes Hjærter,« svarer jeg.

Men da vi vender os om, staar Møllen med sine store sorte Vinger
lige for os. Jeg mærker en Gysen gennemfare Grethe og jeg spørger:
»Blev Du bange for Møllen?«

»Nej,« siger hun, »jeg var blot kommen til at fryse af at staa
saalænge.«




XXVI.


                                                    _Nytaarstid._

Frost og Sne har lukket af for den gamle By. I mange Dage er intet
Bud fra Omverdenen trængt ind til den. Men da Proviant forefindes i
rigelig Mængde og det tilmed er Ferietid, føler Byen ingen Uhygge
som indespærret Fæstning. Den lever blot saameget stærkere sit eget
Liv, den samler som en Høne Kyllingerne under sine lune Vinger; den
glemmer, at den er ifærd med at udvikle sig til en udadstræbende
Fremtidsby med Bank og Eksportforeninger; den bliver atter helt og
ganske den gamle By.

Naar jeg møder de ringlende Kanetog med lystige pelsindhyllede unge
Herrer og Damer; naar jeg hører den skingrende Jubel og den leende
Hvinen fra Børnene, der kjælker ned ad Vejrbakkens Sneskraaninger;
naar jeg ser Fjorden sort af farende Skøjteløbere og naar om Aftenen
Sang og Dansemusik toner bag de festligt oplyste Vinduer -- da
mindes jeg hin strænge Vinter for mange Aar siden, da Byen, efter
møjsommeligt at have gravet sig op af Sneen, drog ud paa Fjorden og
holdt Karneval Uger igennem.

Saa fantastisk det staar for min Erindring:

Gennem en Granport kommer man ind i en lang Isgade, der ligger lunt
mellem høje Snemure. Saa pludselig er man paa en stor aaben Plads,
der straaler i Fakkellys og indhegnes af Telte, illuminerede med
kulørte Lamper. Telte, hvor der spises og drikkes, synges og danses.
Og fra Pladsen skærer nye Gader sig ind i Snebjærgene. Man kommer
forbi Huler i magisk Blaalysskær, Snemænd med funklende Ildøjne,
Smaaboder, hvor gamle Kællinger i Tranlampe-Belysning braser Aal og
Pandekager, et Varmeskur, der benævnes den gloende Ovn, og man naaer
ind i en Lund af Grantræer, hvor der er Trængsel om en Karrusel
med Slæder, der har den oplivende Egenskab, at den i hver Omgang
lader en Slæde vende Koldbøtte i en Drive. Snebyen forgrener og
breder sig endnu videre. Vi Børn naaer aldrig til dens Ende, thi der
gaar Rygter om megen Vildskab og uhyggelige Slagsmaal i dens fjærne
mørke Forstæder, dér den gamle Bys Svende og Lærlinge mødes med de
fjendlig sindede Folk fra den anden Side Fjorden. Vi bliver, hvor
Lyset hersker og Uskylden boer. Hvor vore Søstre og deres Veninder
farer os forbi i susende Fart med deres Kavallerer eller opfører en
ikke altid saa vellykket, men des muntrere Skøjte-Lanciers. Henad
Aftensmad-Tid er hele Byen paa Fjorden. Saa kommer Mødre og Fædre
for at hente de unge Døtre og Børnene, eller de bringer Maden med
i Kurve. Inde i den gloende Ovn slaar man sig da sammen, Venner
og Bekendte, og dækker et Fællesbord med de forskellige Madkurves
Herligheder. Og naar man bagefter vandrer hjemad, stiger Raketter
op over Fjorden, hvor den summende Karnevalstummel først forstummer
sent paa Natten.

       *       *       *       *       *

Grethe og jeg var i Formiddags en Kanetur. Nede ved Fjorden gjorde
vi Holdt og gik ud paa Isen mellem Skøjteløberne. Der var Liv og
Glæde, men ikke det Æventyr-Sceneri som i gamle Dage. Jeg følte
mig maaske en Kende skuffet over den glatte velfejede Bane og hele
det ordnede sportsmæssige Præg, Forlystelsen havde faaet; saameget
ivrigere fortabte jeg mig i Genopfriskelsen af de gamle Minder.
Først sent opdagede jeg, at Grethe, den ellers saa ligelige, gik
ganske tavs og med et forpint Udtryk i Øjnene af fjærntskuende
Sørgmod. Bekymret spurgte jeg, hvad hende fattedes.

»Min egen Ven«, sagde hun, »tilgiv mig. Det er slet intet uden
Barnagtighed. Mens vi gik her blandt alle disse Mennesker, der
ligesom jager hæsblæsende efter Glæden, overfaldt der mig en Angst
for at miste Dig. Jeg syntes, de vilde rive Dig fra mig. Jeg
syntes, din Tale hastede bort med dem, saa langt, langt bort. Tilgiv
mig. Husk, hvor lidet jeg er vant at færdes blandt Mange. Husk, det
er første Gang, vi har forladt de stille Steder.«

Hun smiler atter til mig, hun trykker ømt min Arm. Men jeg fører
hende hastigt bort fra Skøjteløbernes Bane; vi stiger op i den
ventende Kane, og vi vender tilbage til de stille Steder.




XXVII.


                                                     _7. Januar._

Idag kom der Slædepost. Den bragte mig et Brev fra min Forlægger,
der drilsk spørger, om jeg ikke snart er ked af mit Eneboerliv og
om det ikke kunde friste mig til en Tilbagevenden at blive Leder af
et stort literært Foretagende, som han paatænker. De Vilkaar, han
kunde byde, er saa gode, at jeg foreløbig ikke behøvede at frygte
økonomiske Vanskeligheder.

For nogle Maaneder siden vilde jeg maaske have vaklet. Nu behøver
mit Svar ingen Overvejelse. Jeg dypper straks min Pen og skriver:
At jeg ikke kan modtage hans venlige Tilbud, fordi jeg heroppe
er bleven det lykkeligste Menneske i Verden og fordi min Lykke
er bunden til denne Plet Jord. At jeg saaledes uigenkaldelig har
opgivet enhver Tanke om at vende tilbage og at min Deltagelse i
det literære og offenlige Liv maa indskrænke sig til de Bøger,
jeg skriver. At den Bog, han venter, snart kommer og at den vil
efterfølges af andre, der ligner mine tidligere ligesaa lidt. At jeg
har taget Stade paa Vejrbakken, hvor Luften er klar og ren; hvor
Livets Mening bliver lettere at fatte, Lidenskaben mere usammensat,
Følelsen dybere. Endelig, at min Lykke er saa sikker, at den trænger
hverken til Anger eller Anklage; at den tværtimod har Raad til Tak
for alt forbigangent, fordi den uden det ikke vilde været saa stor.

Inden jeg afsender mit Svar, viser jeg Grethe Brevet fra
Forlæggeren. Da hun har læst det, siger hun, efter et Øjebliks
Tavshed:

»Jeg faar nu Anledning til at sige Dig noget, jeg har tænkt paa
stadig siden hin Dag paa Isen. Jeg tør ikke holde Dig tilbage. Du
kan for en kort Stund trives her; før eller senere vil alt det, Du
kom fra, atter kalde Dig. Jeg finder det kun rigtigt og naturligt.
Og derfor skal Du vide, at jeg intet Baand lægger paa Dig. Gør, som
Du vil og maa. Gør med mig, hvad Du vil. Lad mig blive her, om Du
maaske frygter mig som en Hæmsko, hvad Du har Grund til efter min
dumme Adfærd forleden. Eller tag mig med, om Du mener at have nogen
Brug for mig og om Du tør tro mig paa mit Ord, at jeg er grundig
kureret for min Dumhed. Jeg følger Dig, hvorhen Du vil. Vejrbakken
var hidtil mit Hjem. Uden Dig vil jeg være hjemløs paa Vejrbakken.
Livet og Verden derude skræmmede mig. Sammen med Dig vil jeg ingen
Frygt føle. Og siger Du, at jeg maa blive her for Faders Skyld, saa
svarer jeg: Det er ikke Fader mest, som ikke har villet herfra. Til
Tider tror jeg endog, han gærne rejste. Maaske var det ogsaa bedre
for ham. Han er gammel, hans Sind plages ofte i den sidste Tid af
sære Tanker deroppe i Stilheden. Han ligesom frygter Møllen, han
tror, den kalder paa ham; at den bebrejder ham, at han har standset
den. Mod min Fader gør vi ingen Uret ved at rejse. -- Men vil Du, at
jeg skal blive her og vente paa Dig, da er ogsaa det godt. Maaske
synes Du, at Du helst en Tid maa være ene og prøve dit Hjærte: om
det nu ikke blot var her i Ensomheden, at Du trængte til mig. Alt,
hvad Du bestemmer, alt, hvad Du gør med mig, er godt. Thi jeg elsker
Dig.«

Jeg lader Grethe tale til Ende. Var det haardt og stygt af mig, min
søde Veninde? Var det egenkærlig grusomt, at min Sjæl intet vilde
spilde af de velsignede Ord, som dit angstfulde Hjærte udblødte? Jeg
tror, Du tilgiver mig, for den dobbelte Fryd, mit Svar nu voldte.

Mit Svar, som Du fik sort paa hvidt i Svaret til Forlæggeren.




XXVIII.


                                          _Slutningen af Januar._

Grethe havde aldrig spurgt mig om min Fortid, det Spørgsmaal, som
plejer at være det første, en Mand hører af sin Elskede. Jeg tænkte:
Skulde det skyldes Uvidenhed? Utvivlsomt ikke. Grethes Viden om
Livet var tydelig og klar. Hun talte uden Omsvøb om det, som unge
Piger ellers anser det for et Uskyldighedsbevis at rødme over.
Skulde det da maaske skyldes en altfor god Tro til mig?

Jeg vilde ingen Tvivl, intet Bedrag i det Punkt. Og jeg spurgte
hende idag.

Aldrig har jeg set Grethe saa overvættes lystig. Hun lo saa
hjærteligt, saa overgivent, at hun næsten ikke kunde holde op.
Omsider sagde hun: »Nej, Du er virkelig for morsom. Du spørger,
halvt fornærmet, om jeg anser Dig for at have levet, som de gamle
Damer i Stiftelsen lever. Nej, min Ven, Du kan berolige Dig. Du har
for tydeligt indskærpet Offenligheden dine Letsindigheder, til at
Nogen skulde tvivle om, hvilken forfærdelig Person Du er.«

Og hun lo atter, saa jeg blev ganske forvirret. Efterhaanden
genvandt hun sin Alvor og sagde -- vi gik i Skoven --: »Lad os sætte
os her paa Bænken, saa skal jeg forklare Dig Grunden til, at din
slemme Fortid aldrig har foruroliget mig, ja, at den tværtimod,
efter hvad jeg véd om den, yder mig Sikkerhed for, at Du nu først
føler det, jeg forstaar ved Kærlighed. Du kan bagefter sige mig, om
jeg har Ret eller Uret.

Først maa jeg tilstaa, at min Sikkerhed intet har at gøre med den --
vistnok af Mændene -- udbredte Mening, at en Mand bør anvende en Del
af sin Ungdom til at rase ud. Jeg tror ikke paa, at Jert Raseri er
saa stort, at I behøver det.

Nej, min Sikkerhed har en Grund, jeg selv har udspekuleret og som
jeg bilder mig ind er noksaa solid. Jeg har i alle dine Bekendelser
forgæves ledt efter _Barnet_. Mange begejstrede Ord har Du ødslet
paa at lovprise dine Elskerinders Dejlighed. Du har udstyret dem
med alle Fortrin. Kun ét nægtede Du dem: Berettigelsen til at føde
dine Børn. Maaske har det ikke været Dig bevidst. Ialfald synes det
mig, at Du ligefrem med Flid gaar udenom Børnespørgsmaalet, hvori
jeg ser al virkelig Kærligheds baade Begyndelse og Ende. Hvad kan
den Kvinde være en Mand værd, hvem han ikke ønsker at skænke Frugten
af sit Favntag? Det er dog det store Under, den Lykke over al Lykke
i Favntaget mellem Mand og Kvinde, at dér mødes deres Kærligheds
Evighedstrang, Trangen til at vide sig forenede ud i de fjærne Tider
gennem Børnene og atter disses Børn og saa fremdeles, til Dagenes
Ophør. Hvis jeg hvilede i dine Arme og jeg fornam din Vilje kølnes
af Frygten for Barnet, jeg vilde føle den dybeste Beskæmmelse. Jeg
vilde tænke: til en flygtig Lyst, et Sansernes hensigtsløse Behag
er jeg ham god. Men han værdiger ikke at lade mit Skød bære hans
Evighedstanke. -- Nu er jeg stolt og sikker, fordi jeg tror at vide,
at jeg er den første, hvem Du har ønsket at se som dine Børns Moder.
Og jeg nærer ingen Misundelse til din Fortid og de Kvinder, der
fylder den. Stakler, om de elskede Dig; thi deres Hjærter vil da,
selv under dine mest glødende Kærtegn og Smigerord, have følt Tomhed
og Skuffelse. I modsat Fald er de end ingen Beklagelse værd. De
fandt, hvad de søgte. De tog, ingen af dem, noget af den Lykke, din
Kærlighed forjætter mig.«

       *       *       *       *       *

»Har jeg saa« -- spurgte Grethe -- »haft Uret i ikke at foruroliges
af din Fortid?«

Men uden Ord knælede jeg ned og lagde mit Hoved i hendes Skød.




XXIX.


                                                       _Februar._

Det er, som Grethe siger. Det staar ikke vel til med hendes Fader.

Vi er komne under Vejr med, at han i den senere Tid flere Gange,
mens vi var ude, har listet sig over i Møllen. Vi fik Mistanke ved
hans forblommede Ord, og nu forleden saa' vi ham, da han gik derfra.
Han sneg sig bort som En, der er bange for at blive overrasket.
Drejede sagte Nøglen om og lyttede for hvert Skridt.

Vi har været inde i Møllen for at se, om vi kunde opdage, hvad han
foretog sig. Alt stod tilsyneladende urørt.

I Virkeligheden er der jo intet underligt i, om den gamle Mand kunde
føle Lyst til en Gang imellem at færdes i sin Mølle, der rummer
saamange Erindringer for ham. Det ængstende er kun den fordulgte
Maade, hvorpaa han aflægger sine Besøg, og den Omhu, hvormed han
søger at skjule dem for os. Samtidig kan han ikke lade være at sige
Ting, som røber ham.

En Dag, Grethe var gaaet ud af Stuen og han og jeg sad sammen i
Sofaen, rykkede han tæt hen til mig og hviskede: »De har nok lagt
Mærke til, at Grethe ikke holder af, at jeg kommer over til Møllen?
Har hun aldrig fortalt Dem Grunden? Naa ikke. Skal jeg sige Dem,
hvad jeg tror? Hun er bange, fordi jeg er gammel og blind. Hun
mener, at jeg ikke kan klare mig selv længer og at der kunde ske mig
en Ulykke. Grethe er saa omhyggelig for mig, hun er en god Datter
og jeg nænner ikke at gøre hende imod. Men havde jeg ellers noget
Ærind, fandt jeg vel Vej paa Vejrbakken og i Møllen saa godt som
nogen Ung med to karske Øjne.«

I det hele taget kredser hans Tanker sygeligt om Møllen. Det er ikke
blot i Nattens Drømme -- som Grethe, bekymret lyttende ved hans Dør,
har hørt --, at han fantaserer om den. Ogsaa ved højlys Dag spøger
den i hans Sind. Han taler om den som om et levende Væsen, der bærer
Nag til ham og som han frygter Hævn af.

Forgangen Aften sagde han til mig:

»Synes De ikke, at saadan en Mølle, der altid staar, er en underlig
Ting? Ja naturligvis, var den gammel og aflægs, blev det jo en anden
Sag. Men Møllen fejler ikke noget, den har sine Sager iorden baade
indvendig og udvendig. Og dens Bestemmelse her i Verden er dog at
gaa, saalænge dens Kræfter slaar til. Ser De, der er jo ogsaa noget
ydmygende i det, at Folk, som ikke véd bedre Besked og som ikke har
kendt den i de Tider, den var den raskeste Mølle paa Egnen, kunde
falde paa at tro, at den overhovedet ikke _kan_ gaa. Nej, jeg har
ikke handlet ret mod Møllen. Enten burde jeg afstaaet den til en
Yngre, da jeg selv blev gammel og træt, eller jeg burde have skudt
den som en Jagthund, hvis Herre ikke længer duer til at føre den paa
Mark og i Skov og ikke vil se den i nogen Andens Eje.«

Grethe, der var kommen ind og havde hørt de sidste Ord, gjorde et
Tegn til mig, og jeg sagde:

»Ja, Møller, jeg synes ogsaa, det er Synd for Møllen. De vilde gøre
vel imod den ved at rive den ned. Saa er den død og borte og faar
Fred, og De med.«

»Det bliver vel ogsaa dertil,« svarede Mølleren. »Ja, naturligvis,
det maa sagtens saa være. Men man gaar ikke til det med let Sind.
Man véd dog aldrig, om der ikke kunde være Gærning for den endnu en
Gang. Om ikke i min Tid, saa naar den nye Mand tager min Plads.«

»Jamen Fader,« indskød Grethe. »Den nye Mand er jo kommen, og han
har helleringen Brug for Møllen.«

»Nej, det er nok ogsaa sandt,« smilede den Gamle. »Den nye Mand har
selv ladet sin Mølle staa.«

       *       *       *       *       *

-- -- Men siden har Grethe og jeg talt om, at vi for enhver Pris maa
have hendes Fader til at tillade Møllens Nedrivning.




XXX.


                                               _Sidst i Februar._

Vi har besluttet at gifte os til Maj. Hvad har vi at vente paa? I
Møllerhuset er der Plads og Mad nok. Det lidet, vi mere behøver,
kan jeg vel digte mig til. Foreløbig skal Resthonoraret for min nye
Bog anvendes til Grethes Brudekjole. Hun skænder paa mig for min
Letsindighed, men jeg vil, at hun skal være den smukkeste og fineste
Brud, som den gamle By har sét. Bryllupet skal staa i Stiftelsens
lille landsbyagtige Kirke, og der maa ingen faa Adgang uden de gamle
Damer. Men vor Veninde og tre andre gode Jomfruer fra Stiftelsen
skal som Brudepiger følge Grethe til Alteret. Efter Vielsen drikker
vi et Glas Champagne med Brudefølget, men der skal ogsaa være sød
fransk Vin for dem, der foretrækker det. Naar vi saa kører hjem,
lader vi Vognen holde udenfor Kirkegaarden; thi Grethe vil lægge
sin Brudekrans paa Moders Grav, den, der forenede os. Og saa holder
vi vort Indtog paa Vejrbakken som Mand og Kone og flytter ind i
Møllerhusets øvre Etage, der har staaet tom og ubenyttet, lige
siden Grethes Moder døde. Det er Maj, Bøgen nys udsprungen, Luften
fuld af Blomsterduft, og i Vejrbakkens Skov synger Nattergalen sine
Elskovsmelodier.

Dagene rinder hastigt, mens Grethe og jeg lever vor store Lykke og
drømmer om den end større Lykke, der venter os, naar Foraaret kommer.

Om Morgenen gaar vi som Regel en lang Tur. Enten i Byens afsides
Gyder og Stræder, hvis Navne alene henflytter En til en fjærn Fortid
og hvoraf enkelte, fornemmeligst den ældgamle Peblingegyde, der i
Trappeafsatser bugter sig mellem faldefærdige Rønner og forvitret
Murværk, er saa snæver, at den maa passeres i Gaasegang. Eller vi
søger ud paa de høje, aabne Landeveje, hvor Blikket skuer vidt og
Tankerne drager paa Rejse ud i Fremtiden. Forfriskede af den kolde
Luft, varme og rødmussede af den gode Bevægelse vender vi saa hjem
til vort Arbejde. Jeg til min Bog, som nu skrider hastigt og sikkert
fremad. Grethe til sit Udstyr.

Der ligger fra Moderens Tid fuldt op i Kister og Skabe af Linned og
Dækketøj, stærke hjemmevævede Sager. Men Grethe vil ikke gaa som en
doven Brud til Brudesengen. Den skal klædes med Lagener, sømmede,
stukne og navnede af hende selv. Og som den skal hele Brudehuset
være. Symaskinen snurrer Dagen lang, og om Aftenen trædes Traaden,
mens jeg sidder hos og ofte bringer Forstyrrelse i Arbejdet ved at
kysse de kære travle Hænder.

En Aften finder jeg Grethe ilag med at klippe fint Lærred ud i
bittesmaa Stykker. Jeg sidder og bryder mit Hoved med, hvad det
vel skal blive til, og Grethe, der ser min Forundring, smiler
underfundigt. Endelig brister min Nysgærrighed, og jeg spørger: »Er
det Dig eller mig, der skal pyntes med det Dukketøj?«

»Nej,« svarer hun. »Det er vor Førstefødtes Skjorter.«

Halvt spøgende, halvt alvorligt siger jeg: »Pas paa, Barn, at ikke
dit altfor sikre Haab skuffes. Der blev vel ogsaa Tid nok siden at
ordne Sønnens Udstyr.«

Hun ser paa mig med Taarer i Øjnene: »Det maa Du ikke sige. Jeg vil
ikke tænke noget saa sørgeligt. Hvad Mening var der saa i al min
Kærlighed, om jeg ikke engang skulde kunne føde Dig en Søn? Og din
Søn skal ikke komme til et fattigt og uforberedt Hjem. Han skal
hellerikke bære Klæder, købte i Boder, fremmede Klæder, hvori ingen
Tanke om ham gemmes. Derfor syer jeg hans Tøj nu, mens jeg er rask
og har Kræfter til det. Hvordan det bliver siden, kan man aldrig
vide. Skulde det saa end hændes, at jeg døde fra ham, vil Du dog,
naar han bliver stor nok til at fatte det, kunne fortælle ham, at
hans Moder havde sørget for ham, saavidt hun formaaede. Og han vil
aldrig føle sig ganske moderløs.«

       *       *       *       *       *

-- -- »Saa er Du ikke vred paa mig og synes ikke, jeg er overspændt,
ejheller altfor tillidsfuld? Hvilken Gud skulde misunde en Kvinde
den Lykke at drage Omsorg for det Barn, hun gærne ofrer Livet for at
føde?«

Dette sagde hun, da hun i den mørke Aften stod ude paa Vejrbakken
og rakte mig Haanden til Godnat. Jeg drog hende ind til mig og
hviskede: »Du bedste af alle Mødre.«




XXXI.


                                                      _8. Marts._

Det er nu bestemt, at Møllen skal rives ned. Den Gamle har givet sit
Samtykke, om fjorten Dage tages der fat paa Arbejdet. Efter først
endelig at have fattet sin Beslutning synes Mølleren beroliget.
Saavidt vi kan skønne, har han i den sidste Tid end ikke aflagt
Smugbesøg i Møllen.

Beslutningen om Møllens Nedrivning har bragt Ro over os alle.
Uden at ville tilstaa det for hinanden gik Grethe og jeg begge i
Ængstelse for, at en Ulykke skulde ske. Hvor let kunde det ikke
hænde, naar den gamle blinde Mand færdedes alene i Møllen, at han
snublede paa en af de stejle Trapper, styrtede igennem en Luge eller
kom galt afsted med Hjulværket? Grethe har nu tilstaaet det: ofte
naar hun afslog en Spadseretur under Foregivende af Travlhed med
Udstyret, var det Frygt for at forlade Faderen, der holdt hende
hjemme.

Nu er alt trygt og godt som før. Og om Aftenen sidder vi og drøfter,
alle tre, hvad Volden skal bruges til, naar Møllen er borte. Den
Gamle mener, at, da Møllen hidtil har tjent mange Skippere som
Sømærke, bør han tilbyde Grunden til Oprejselse af et andet let
iøjnefaldende Mærke. Men Grethe hævder, at mange andre Punkter paa
Vejrbakken egner sig ligesaa godt dertil; at Volden er deres egen og
at Ingen kan fortænke dem i, at de indretter den til deres Behag.
Hun og jeg har en Plan, som vi haaber at faa hendes Fader til at
bifalde.

Paa Volden vil vi bygge et Lysthus i antik Tempelstil. Rundt om det,
paa Voldgangen, planter vi en Krans af skærmende Graner, men op om
Templet og dets Søjler skal i Tidens Løb vild Vin og vilde Roser og
Kaprifolier slynge sig. Og paa dets Frontespice fæster vi i gylden
Skrift Indvielsens Ord: _Til Vejrbakkens Gud_.

Vejrbakkens Gud, Fredens Gud, vor Lykkes Gud vil vi bygge vort
Blomster-Tempel, vort Olymps idylliske Parnas. Her vil vi sidde og
skue vidt over Land, lade Verden støje under os, høre Stormen suse
og Uvejret knitre om os og alle Dage, i Storm som i Stille, skærmes
af Fredens milde Paulun. Her vil vi sidde, mens vi er unge og Roser
og Vin og Kaprifolier ranker sig om vore Hjærter; her vil vi ogsaa
sidde, naar de gamle Aar kommer og Mindernes Duft ombølger os. Herop
vil vi føre vore Børn, mens de er smaa, og lære dem at bøje Knæ for
vor Gud, og her vil vi vente dem, naar de, prøvede i Livets Kamp,
søger Hvile i Barndomshjemmets Tempel. Men allerdejligst synes vi,
det vil være -- vi smiler ad vore Drømmes ufortrødne Flugt --, naar
den Dag kommer, da vor Søn og hans Brud tager vor Plads mellem Roser
og Kaprifolier.

I Fællesskab bygger vi vort Tempel. Men den Dag, Templet er rejst og
vi staar sammen deroppe, vil jeg fortælle Grethe, hvordan jeg, alt
før jeg kendte hende, og længe før jeg vidste, jeg elskede hende,
tilbad hende som Fredens Gudinde og af Møllen byggede hende et
Højalter.




XXXII.


                                                     _19. Marts._

Foraaret kommer tidligt iaar. De sidste otte Dages lune Regn og
bagende Sol har allerede bragt Skovbundens Blomster til at pible
frem af det brune Løvdække, har allerede vakt Fuglesangen foroven.

Det er lige efter Solopgang, da jeg imorges henter Grethe til vor
Spadseretur. Morgensolen har kaldt paa mig, jeg nænnede ikke at sove
de dejlige Timer bort. Og jeg staar fløjtende udenfor Møllerhuset,
hvor alt endnu er lukket. Et Gardin rulles op, og Grethe kommer til
Syne i hvid Natdragt, med det rige brune Haar frit nedhængende og
glimtende gyldent i Solen. Hun nikker smilende til mig og sender mig
et Godmorgen saa fornøjet, at hele Luften fyldes med Glæde. Men da
jeg tænker paa, at denne livstraalende Ungdom er min og at om en
føje Stund dette frodige hvide Legeme skal hvile i mine Arme og være
min Hu til Vilje, svimler det for mig.

       *       *       *       *       *

Vi gaar i Skoven og drikker Foraarets stærke Vin, som Solen perser
af tusind gærende Safte. Jeg ser Blodet stige i Grethes Kinder, jeg
hører det banke i hendes Haand, som jeg holder i min. Foraarets Rus
er i os, dens liflige Døsighed gyder sig gennem vore Aarer. Grethe
bøjer sig ind til mig, træt søger hun, med Hovedet lænet mod min
Skulder, Støtte ved min Arm, og hun siger sagte:

»Hører Du den samme Sang som jeg?«

»Hvilken Sang hører Du?«

»Der er Stemmer, som higende kalder, og der er Stemmer, som vigende
lokker. De leger med hinanden, snart klagende fjærnt, snart
sukkende nær; snart spørgende og svarende, snart flydende sammen
i et jublende Møde af alle Toner ... Jeg synes, det er Naturens
Bryllupssang, der lyder om os. Hører Du den ikke ogsaa?«

»Jeg hører Naturen kalde til Fest: Frem alle Blomster, syng alle
Fugle, spring ud alle Træer. Stat tidligt op, smyk Jer og øv Jer.
Vaaren er kommen alt nu, at I kan være rede. Thi naar Majdag rinder,
staar Vejrbakkens Prinsesse Brud. -- Jeg hører Naturen synge dit
Bryllup ind.«

       *       *       *       *       *

Vor Vej standses af en Bæk, der ellers risler med sparsomt Vand
mellem store Stene, men som Vaarbruddet har ladet svulme over alle
Bredder. Kun hist og her rager en Sten op.

»Vi maa vel vende om?« spørger jeg.

Grethe læner sig ømt til mig: »Jeg er saa foraarsdoven,« siger hun.
»Jeg vil nødig gaa en Omvej. Tror Du ikke nok, Du kan bære mig?«

Hun slaar sine Arme om min Nakke, jeg løfter den store Pige, og jeg
staar med hende ude i Bækken. Jeg føler hendes bløde Legeme tæt mod
mit, hendes varme Aande i mit Ansigt. Jeg mærker ingen Byrde, men
atter svimler det for mig. Jeg maa tage al min Vilje sammen for ikke
at styrte med hende.

... Saa sidder vi, begge lidt forpustede, paa Bænken hinsides
Bækken. Men Grethe lægger sit Hoved til mit og hvisker i mit Øre:

»Du, min stærke Brudgom. Saa dejligt jeg havde det i dine Arme.«

       *       *       *       *       *

Foraaret kommer tidligt iaar. Der kimer Bryllupsklokker i Naturen.
Brudefolkene længes mod Bryllupets Dag.


                                                     _21. Marts._

Jeg har faaet mine Papirer fra Hovedstaden, de Attester, uden hvilke
man ikke bliver gift, selv ikke paa Vejrbakken. Jeg ser, at jeg i
min Alders første Aar blev kokoppeindpodet og at Podningen »slog
an«. Himlen være lovet. Ellers havde jeg formodenlig ikke faaet
Tilladelse at indtræde i Ægtestanden.

Imorgen eller i Overmorgen begynder Nedrivningen af Møllen. Den
Gamle var i helt godt Humør iaften.




XXXIII.


                                                     _22. Marts._

Grethe er imorges kommen til Skade oppe ved Møllen. Lægen giver
ganske godt Haab.


                                              _Samme Dags Aften._

Der var nok blæst en stærk Storm op inat. Jeg synes forresten ikke,
det blæste noget videre, da jeg gik op til Møllen, men jeg tænkte jo
hellerikke saa meget paa Vejret.

Da jeg fra Skoven naaede ud til Bakkekammen, ser jeg Grethe staa
oppe paa Møllevolden mellem Vingerne, akkurat som første Gang, jeg
saa' hende paa Vejrbakken. Saa er Arbejderne altsaa ikke komne
endnu, tænkte jeg. Det var maaske ogsaa for tidligt. Og jeg tænkte
videre, at Grethe sagtens var gaaet derop for at tage Afsked
med Møllen. Hun saa' mig ikke, hun stirrede ud over Fjorden. Jeg
svingede med Hatten, jeg kaldte paa hende. Hun hørte mig ikke, hun
stod i dybe Tanker. Og Blæsten har vel ogsaa baaret imod.

Pludselig gav det et Ryk i Vingerne. Jeg tror nok, jeg udstødte
et Skrig. Enten har hun hørt mit Skrig, eller hun har selv mærket
Faren. Hun drejede Hovedet, vore Blikke mødtes, hun gjorde en
Bevægelse som for at styrte frem, i det samme Sekund faldt hun
lydløst til Jorden, ramt af den ene Vinge. Og den næste Vinge fulgte
efter, hen over hendes Legeme, og den næste. Rundt og rundt, i
stigende Fart, gik Vingerne, henover Grethe. Jeg tænkte, mens jeg
løb: Du er bleven forstyrret i Hovedet, det er Svimmelhed, alt gaar
rundt for Dig. Men saa saa' jeg jo, at Grethes Legeme ikke skiftede
Plads.

Paa den anden Side af Møllen, ligefor Voldtrappen, fandt jeg Grethes
Fader. Han stod og gjorde et Tov fast. Han smilede saa underligt.
Den Tanke fo'r mig gennem Hovedet: han har i Sindssyge dræbt sin
Datter. En vanvittig Tanke. Jeg anede i det samme alt. Jeg sagde
i Forbifarten roligt: »Grethe er bleven ramt af Vingerne.« Da jeg
naaede hen til hende, stod Møllen atter. Hendes Fader havde vel
standset den. Jeg laa bøjet over hende, hun rørte sig ikke. Hun var
helt hvid i Ansigtet, men jeg saa' ikke Saar eller Blod. Jeg kaldte
paa hende, jeg blev ved at nævne hendes Navn. Saa aabnede hun sine
Øjne og smilede, lukkede straks Øjnene igen, men Smilet blev om
hendes Mund. Hun havde sét mig og hun smilede! Aa Gud, aa Gud! hun
var ikke død.

En Hulken lød bag mig og en rystende Haand famlede paa min Skulder.
Det var den Gamle. »Hun lever!« sagde jeg. »Men vi maa have hende
baaret ind.« -- Jeg saa' op; lidt borte stod tre, fire Arbejdere i
en Klynge med brave medlidende Øjne. De trængte sig stille frem for
at hjælpe. Og en af dem sagde: »Der er gaaet Bud efter Læge.«

Vi bar hende ind, og Lægen kom.

Hendes Tilstand er iaften uforandret. Hun ligger bevidstløs hen.
Slaget har ramt hende paa den højre Side af Hovedet. Der er kun
en Skramme og nogen Hævelse at se. Men Lægen frygter enten en
Hjærnerystelse eller et Brud.

       *       *       *       *       *

Min Anelse om Ulykkens Aarsag bekræfter sig. Grethes Fader vilde en
sidste Gang, inden den blev revet ned og bragtes til evig Ro, lade
Møllen gaa. Ved sine hemmelige Besøg derovre havde han forvisset sig
om, at Maskineriet var i Orden. Han er imorges gaaet tidligt op til
Møllen, har rimeligvis været inde i den, da Grethe kom. Under Larmen
af den stærke Blæst har hun ikke hørt hans Puslen hverken derinde
eller da han gik ud paa den modsatte Side. Saa har han trukket
Persen fra, i samme Nu satte Stormen Møllen i Gang og Ulykken skete.

Saameget har jeg kunnet slutte af de faa Ord, han har sagt.
Han sidder mest hen i stum Fortvivlelse. Det er en Ynk at se.
Pinefuldere næsten end at dvæle ved Grethes stille Sygeleje.
Men da Arbejderne kom og spurgte, om de saa skulde begynde
Nedbrydnings-Arbejdet, sagde han, at de kunde gaa. Han vilde sende
Bud efter dem, naar han behøvede dem.




XXXIV.


                                                     _24. Marts._

Hun er død. Min Grethe, min kære Pige er død.

Vi vidste jo hele Dagen igaar, at der intet Haab var. Feberen og
Vildelsen begyndte om Natten, og Lægen gik om Morgenen uden at sige
noget. Jeg kunde ikke spørge. Jeg forstod, det var overflødigt.

Jeg har siddet hos hende og maattet tvinge Smil og Glæde frem i mit
Ansigt. Hun troede, hun laa til Sengs, fordi hun havde født vort
Barn. Hun var saa lykkelig, men en Gang imellem græd hun, fordi hun
ikke maatte have Barnet hos sig. Og naar jeg ikke smilede, blev hun
ganske fortvivlet, jamrede sig og sagde, at vi løj for hende: at
Barnet var død eller røvet fra hende. I de Øjeblikke blandede ogsaa
Møllen uhyggelige Forestillinger ind i hendes Fantasier. Hun troede,
at hendes Fader havde bragt Barnet op til Møllen, og bad mig saa
bønligt hente det tilbage.

Ud paa Aftenen tog Feberen til. Lægen kom, men gik hurtigt igen. Jeg
talte ikke med ham. Jeg sad atter ved Grethes Seng, hun kendte mig
ikke. Hun laa mest med lukkede Øjne, mumlede uhørlige, forvirrede
Ord og fortrak Ansigtet i Smerter. Jeg syntes næsten, det var bedre
saadan. Jeg behøvede jo ikke at skjule min Sorg, jeg kunde holde
hendes stakkels hede Haand i min og græde.

Pludselig slog hun Øjnene, store og klare, op.

»Græder Du, fordi jeg skal dø?« spurgte hun.

Jeg sank ned paa Gulvet og lagde mit Hoved i hendes Puder. Hun strøg
sin Haand nedover det, mildt og længe. Saa sagde hun:

»Du maa ikke græde for min Skyld. Jeg har det saa godt. Det er ikke
slemt at dø. Baade din og min Moder kalder paa mig: de smiler saa
kærligt til mig; de viser mig, at der er Plads til mig imellem dem.«

En mørk Skygge gled over hendes Blik. Hun rejste sig op i Sengen:
»Barnet! Hvor er Barnet? Det er Synd af Dig at lade mig vente saa
forfærdelig længe!«

Saa faldt hun tilbage, hendes Øjne var atter klare, men store Taarer
trængte sig frem.

»Min egen Ven,« sagde hun, »læg dit Hoved tæt til mit. Der er noget,
jeg vil sige Dig, nu mens jeg véd rigtig Besked med alt og inden jeg
dør.«

Jeg gjorde, som hun bad, og hun hviskede:

»Jeg er ikke bange for at dø, men jeg synes, det er saa sørgeligt,
at jeg skal herfra, før jeg har født Dig den Søn, jeg havde lovet
Dig. Nu er det saa lidt, Du har som Minde om mig, saalidt at takke
mig for. Jeg gav Dig jo kun mig selv en stakket Stund. Og knap nok
det gjorde jeg. Nej, Du maa ikke afbryde mig og ikke sige mig imod;
jeg maa have Lov at sige det altsammen, som jeg føler det. Jeg
bebrejder mig, at jeg lod Dig vente. Jeg syntes vel, det var Dig,
der skulde bede. Du skal vide, at alt, hvad Du havde bedt om, havde
jeg givet Dig. Du skal vide, at hin Formiddag i Skoven, da vi hørte
Bryllupssangen tone om os, var jeg af mit ganske Hjærte, af hele
min Længsel din Brud. Og det vil jeg, uden at rødme, sige Gud paa
hans Trone, at jeg gik grædende fra Jorden, fordi jeg ikke naaede at
hvile som Brud i dine Arme.«

»Nu er det Tid,« sagde hun lidt efter, »at Du henter Fader herind.«

Men da hun havde kysset den Gamle, bad hun om at maatte sove,
smilede til mig, lukkede sine Øjne og slog dem ikke mere op.




XXXV.


                                                     _Løst Blad._

Foraaret gaar sin Sejrsgang op over Vejrbakken, med stort Følge af
glade Mennesker nede fra Byen. Unge og Gamle, Børn og Kærestefolk,
værdige Mænd og Matroner, ja selv værkbrudne Stakler -- alle skal de
med at se Vaaren paa Vejrbakken.

       *       *       *       *       *

Strøende gylden Sol for alle Vinde fører Foraaret an, og de glade
Mennesker fra Byen udpeger beundrende for hinanden dets stolte
Bedrifter.

»Alt staar Hækken i Knop, og i Vejkanten blomstrer Violer. Pluk mig
et Par, jeg vil fæste dem ved mit Bryst.«

»Nej, kære, pas dog paa, at Du ikke træder paa Sneglen. Og se
Sommerfuglene dér, den ganske gule og den røde med de sorte Pletter.
Herregud, lad dem flagre i Fred, lad dem nyde Foraaret ligesom vi.«

»Hørte I Stæren, Børn. Og Pipfuglen hist. Den flyver med Straa til
sin Rede.«

       *       *       *       *       *

Toget standser ved Pavillonen, som Foraaret har vakt af sin Dvale;
hvor, Vinteren igennem, kun en enlig Fremmed har været Gæst.

»Lad os drikke et Glas for Vaaren. For Vaaren og Livet. For Livet og
Glæden.«

»Hvad I ikke spiser, Børn, strø det for Spurvene. Vi maa ikke glemme
Vinterens Fugle, fordi Foraaret er kommet.«

       *       *       *       *       *

De glade Mennesker fra Byen følger Foraaret videre, op gennem Skoven.

»Saa lifligt her dufter af Muld og Gran. Men gaa ikke i Græsset, det
har regnet i Nat.«

»Jo, i Græsset maa jeg. Jeg har fundet en blaa Anemone. Og de hvide
dér. Hvormange der er, naar man ret ser efter.«

»Og tænk Bøgen. Saa store Knopper den alt har. Tro mig, den springer
ud før Maj, hvis dette Foraar varer ved.«

»Vist varer det ved. Spørg blot Fuglene, der jubler. De véd Besked.«

       *       *       *       *       *

Foraaret staar triumferende paa Vejrbakkens Kam, og de glade
Mennesker udbryder i høje Fryderaab:

»Helt herop er Vaaren naaet. Møllevolden er klædt med nyt Græs,
og Vingerne skinner som Guld i Solen. I Møllerens Have knoppes
Frugtblomsterne, i en Stue vilde de hastigt udfolde sig. Hvem der
turde bryde en Gren!«

Da aabnes Døren til Møllerhuset, en klam Luftning gaar hen over
de glade Mennesker: paa sit hvide Leje hviler en ung Kvinde, kold
og bleg. Og ved hendes Side staar en Mand, den Fremmede paa
Vejrbakken. Hans Øjne græder ikke, de har ingen Taarer fler. Han
siger, bøjet over sin kolde, blege Brud: »Vaaren er død.«




XXXVI.


                                                     _30. Marts._

Idag er Grethe bragt til Hvile paa Kirkegaarden.

I Stiftelsens Kirke forrettedes Andagten. Dér sad alle de gamle
Kvinder og græd uhyklede Taarer over Grethe, fordi hun, der havde
bragt Ungdom og Skønhed ind i deres falmede Hjærter, var gaaet bort
midt i sin unge Glæde. Paa hendes Kiste havde de lagt Kranse, bundne
med deres egne rystende Hænder, Kranse af Vedbend og Mos, prydede
med Evighedsblomster og troskyldige Farvel-Indskrifter i sorte og
hvide Perler. Og saa sang de nu for hende, der havde sunget for dem,
sang med deres spinkle, brustne Stemmer: »Tænk, naar en Gang den
Taage er forsvunden.« Aa Gud, aa Gud. Her var det, hun havde glædet
sig saa inderligt til at skulle staa Brud, her, hvor hun nu laa i
sin Kiste, en Dødens Brud, klædt i det Lin, hun selv havde sømmet og
syet til sin Fest. -- Mit trætte, forpinte Hoved sank ned ved min
gamle Venindes Bryst. Hun klappede mig og talte til mig som til et
bedrøvet Barn, saadan som hun saamange Gange i svundne Dage havde
trøstet mig og kælet for mig. Baade hun og jeg glemte nok, at jeg nu
var en stor og klog Mand. Jeg syntes, jeg havde det godt ved hendes
enfoldige Bryst; jeg syntes, Sorgen mildnedes, mens hun hviskede:
»Saa maa det da være saa skønt for ham at tænke paa, at hun ikke
skal ligge alene, men skal ud til hans Mo'r. De to vil tale saameget
godt og kærligt om ham, det kan han være forvisset om, og hænder der
ham nogen stor Fortræd eller Modgang, saa vil han fornemme, hvordan
de trøstende omsvæver ham.«

-- Præsten, den stærke Kirkens Svøbe over den gamle Bys
Vankundighed, traadte frem ved Grethes Kiste. Han saa' prøvende
strængt ud mod Forsamlingen, men, som om han uvilkaarligt forstod,
at her ved denne unge Piges Kiste, overfor disse grædende gamle
Kvinder og denne haardt ramte Fremmede, her var Strænghed
Helligbrøde, saa gød sig et Skær af bevæget Menneskelighed over hans
skarpe Træk, og da han begyndte at tale, skælvede hans Stemme:

»Jeg kendte ikke den unge Kvinde, hvem Gud tog bort, just som hun
troede at staa ved den største Jordelykkes Indgang. Men der er mig
om hende intet fortalt uden Godt og Skønt. Hun synes ad egne Veje
paa det høje ensomme Sted, hun boede, at have fundet Fred med Gud og
Verden. Hun synes ogsaa at have haft Evne til at meddele Andre Fred.
Jeg kender ikke dem, der er hendes Nærmeste og hvem hendes Død blev
saa tungt et Slag. Jeg véd ikke, om deres Sorg har søgt den Trøst,
jeg kalder den ene rette. Men mit Hjærte krymper sig i deltagende
Forstaaelse af deres Smerte. Jeg beder Gud skænke hende og dem sin
Fred. Amen.«

Alene med Præsten vandrer jeg henover Kirkegaarden bag Grethes
Kiste. Jeg ser, hvordan Foraaret har begyndt at brede sin Pynt over
Døden. Jeg ser Foraarets Blomster og jeg hører i mit Øre genlyde
Præstens Ord om Guds Fred. Og min Sjæl skriger i Kval: »Du lyver
Præst, ligesom Foraaret paa Gravene lyver. Alverdens Blomster kan
ikke dække den Dødens Gru, at hun, jeg elskede, skal ædes af Ormene.
Alverdens Præster kan ikke lade opstige til mig af Graven den Guds
Fred, som for evigt jordedes med hende.«

Kisten er sænket i Graven, Jordpaakastelsen til Ende, Præsten har
trykket min Haand -- jeg er ene.

Men først rigtig ene dog, da jeg, kold og rystende af at sidde
stille saalænge i den skarpe Foraarsluft, forlader mine Grave og
gaar op paa Vejrbakken, der nu end ikke huser Grethes tomme Ler.

Saa ene, saa ene.




XXXVII.


                                                         _April._

Jeg flygtede jo hertil for at søge Ensomheden. Jeg fandt den. Og om
Grethe ikke var kommen paa min Vej, havde sikkert Ensomheden ikke
skræmmet mig. Thi jeg havde da ikke kendt det Savn, der nu jager mig
som en Fredløs.

En Fredløs er jeg i min Ensomhed. Hvor finder jeg den Krog, som kan
yde mig Fristed? Enten jeg flakker om i den gamle Bys øde Gader
eller jeg løber min Fod træt paa Vejrbakkens stejle Veje, overalt
følger Savnet mig som en graadig Ravn, skrigende hæst i mit Øre,
parat til at hugge sit Næb i mit Hjærte. Der er ikke den Plet,
ikke det Hus, det Træ, der ikke raaber mig mit Savn imøde. »Husk,
sidst Du var her, kom Du med _hende_! Nu er Du alene, hun følger
Dig aldrig mere.« »Her sad Du med hende. I talte om Eders Lykke, I
drømte Jer ud i Fremtiden; alt, hvad I talte, tænkte og drømte, var
Sommer og Sol, idel Liv og Lyst. Nu ligger hun i Jorden, Drømmen har
Dødens kolde Pust splittet.«

Jeg har søgt Freden i Bibliotekets Klostersal, hvis højtidsfulde
Stilhed før dulmede mit Sind til god Hvile i gamle Minder. Men
Ravnen sad paa min Skulder: »Du unge Munk, hvi dvæler dit Blik
saa længselssygt ved Træet derude bag Muren? Bliv kun, hvor Du
er. Dig venter ingen længer, naar Mørket falder over Klosteret. I
Klosterhaven er Nattergalene forstummede. Og i det gamle Træ bygger
Ravnen Rede.«

I Kildehaven har jeg været, jeg tør ikke komme der mer. Jeg syntes
Børnene blev stille, da de saa' mig. Jeg læste i deres Øjne
bedrøvede Spørgsmaal: »Hvor er hun henne, hun, som altid før var med
Dig og som holdt saameget af os? Du maa ikke komme alene, Du skal
hente hende.«

Min Veninde i Stiftelsen sørger over min Troløshed. Netop nu vilde
hun saa gærne vise mig sin Hengivenhed. Hun forstaar det ikke og
jeg nænner ikke at sige hende det: mit saarede Hjærte taaler ikke
de medlidende Blikke, som det maa løbe Spidsrod igennem, saasnart
jeg er indenfor Stiftelsens Porte; som forfølger mig paa Trapper og
i Gange, helt op til hendes Dør, og som modtager mig i hendes egen
Stue, fra hendes egne trofaste Øjne.

Men mest hjærteskærende er det dog at besøge Grethes Fader. At
færdes i de Stuer, som hun fyldte med sin Fred og sin Ynde; hvor
Savnet klager som et forpint Dyr under hvert Skridt, man træder;
hvor Luften endnu skælver af hendes Dødssuk; hvor endelig han
sidder, den gamle Mand, og stirrer med den blinde Skæbnes tomme
Øjne paa det Frygtelige, han har fuldbragt. Hvad har han og jeg
at sige hinanden, som kan bringe Trøst? Han hører næppe nok de
Fornuftbetragtninger, hvormed jeg forsøger at møde hans Selvanklage
og hans forvirrede Udtalelser om Grethes Ulykke som den forurettede
og vrede Mølles Hævn. Er jeg derimod selv ganske upaavirket af hans
sære Grublerier? Eller er det alene Mindet om hin forfærdelige
Morgen, der vækker Uhygge i mit Sind og faar mig til at skælve, naar
jeg passerer Møllen? Endnu ligger den der, endnu har dens Herre ikke
villet fælde Dommen over den.

       *       *       *       *       *

-- -- Men naar Savnet har jaget mig fredløs fra Sted til Sted,
søger jeg Hvile i mit Arbejde, i min Bog. Mens jeg skriver paa den,
glemmer jeg, at Grethe er død. I den lever hun, i den genopstaar
hun med den Guds Fred, som hun skænkede mig, da jeg kom som en træt
Flygtning til Vejrbakkens Ensomhed.




XXXVIII.


                                           _Sidste Dage i April._

Jeg havde Lyst at skrive en Fortale til min Bog, som nu er
færdig. Rigtignok bandlyser den moderne literære Katekismus
Fortaler saavelsom de gamle fortrolige Henvendelser midt i Bogen
fra Forfatteren til hans kære Læser. Et af de første Bud lyder:
Forfatteren maa aldrig stikke sin Person frem og ikke give sin
private Mening til Kende. Forfatteren objektiverer sig i Værket, der
har at tale for sig.

At vise Humbugen heri skulde bl. a. være Hensigten med min Fortale.
Har en Forfatter noget paa Sinde overfor sine Læsere, skal han nok
faa dem det sagt trods Katekismens Forbud. Han lader bare en af
Personerne holde et lille Foredrag. Og hvad nytter det, man forbyder
ham personlig at optræde i sine Bøger? De allerfleste Bøger skrives
om Forfatterne selv. Følgen af Forbudet mod de umaskerede sorte
Dominoer bliver da blot, at Forfatterne kostymerer sig mer eller
mindre smagfuldt, mer eller mindre gennemskueligt. Tag en af vore
Forfatteres samlede Produkter for Dem, og De vil se ham paradere
forbi i en Række skiftende Forklædninger: som Præst og som Læge,
som Ingeniør og som Adelsmand; snart det overlegne Fornuftmenneske,
snart en dybsindig Grubler; snart en barnlig Fantast og snart en
fortvivlet Oprører mod Samfundsordenen. Den naive Mand bilder sig
ind, at han er vel forvaret i sin sindrige Forklædning. Men ikke
blot hans Kaldsfæller, der kender Fiffene, skriver ham straks leende
i Haanden. Ogsaa Læserne, dresserede af den moderne kritiske Metode,
hvis Stolthed det netop er at »finde Katten«, udpeger ham med
Lethed og siger henrykte til hinanden: Har I set den skævbenede Hr.
A.... nu optræder han min Salighed som en uimodstaaelig Ingeniør?
Hvad mener I om den evigglade Hr. B., er han ikke grinagtig, naar
han giver Partiet som den verdensforagtende Naturforsker?

Forklædningen narrer Ingen anden end -- Forfatteren. Han tænker:
siden jeg nu en Gang skal i Kostyme, vil jeg dog gøre mig akkurat
saa prægtig, som jeg dog nok egenlig er. Hvilket latterlig glimrende
Galleri af Selvportræter udviser ikke den moderne Literatur. Hvor
har Forfatterne ikke svælget i at afmale sig som Ynglinge med
dejlige Aasyn, med slanke, elegante Skikkelser, med ildfulde blaa
eller brune Øjne eller Øjne, der betagende skifter i alle Farver.
Eller de har set sig selv i moden Manddom, med Alvor og Myndighed
i det viljestærke Blik, med graanende, men endnu fyldige Lokker. I
kærlig Overbærenhed retoucherer de bort alle Maver og Maaner, alle
Latterligheder og Grimheder. Og hænder det en sjælden Gang, at de,
ved at se sig i Spejlet, faar en Anelse om, at en vis Beskedenhed
maaske vilde være passende, slaar det ikke fejl, at de Svagheder
eller Mangler, de med ædel Oprigtighed vedkender sig, stilles i
en flatterende Belysning af en Ejendommelighed, der overgaar al
sædvanemæssig Skønhed. Eller de tager yderligere Oprejsning for
de koket tilstaaede legemlige Skavanker ved at gøre de aandelige
Fortrin, der aldrig fattes en Forfatters Selvfremstilling, end mere
overvældende.

Saaledes ser vi da vore Forfattere, som Ofre for
Forklædnings-Humbugen, udlevere sig til Spot for en lattermild
Samtid.

Det fik endda være. Værre er det, at Forklædningen hæmmer
Forfatteren i at sige sit Hjærtes usminkede Mening. Maskeradebøgerne
fordrer en pinagtig Hensyntagen til æstetisk Vedtægt, der føles
som Humbug, fordi Forfatteren véd, hvad den er »gjort af«. Vi
kender alle den moderne Romanformel: et første Kapitel, hvor vi
springer badus ud i Handlingen, og et andet Kapitel, hvor vi hales
i Land af en lang og kedsommelig Forhistorie, som Forfatteren
møjsommeligt har sammenstillet til Baggrund for sin Maskerade.
Alle disse Udenomssysler med Garderobe, Maskineri, Dekorationer
og med Personer, der skal agere imod hinanden efter en stereotyp
Kapitel-Regie, suger Marven af den Energi, som skulde gøre Bogen
til et helt og ægte Udtryk for de Oplevelser, Stemninger og
Følelser, der har født den i Forfatterens Sjæl. Kunstletheden og
Kunstfærdigheden kvæler den Hjærtets simple, enfoldige Tilstaaelse,
som det var Bogens Mening at gøre andre Hjærter, der har levet og
følt noget lignende.

Derfor har jeg fortalt min Bog saa lige ud, som jeg har levet den.
Derfor er det »jeg«, der selv henvender mig til Læserne. »Jeg« er
hverken smuk eller grim, hverken en velskabt Trubadur eller en
dæmonisk Pukkelryg. »Jeg« er kun et Hjærte med Trang til at synge
sin Fryd og sin Kvide. »Kostymet« passer sagtens til de store
Bøger, der skildrer Samfundets Maskerade. Hjærtets smaa Bøger
skrives bedst af den, der ikke forsøger at være andet end »jeg«.




XXXIX.


                                                     _30. April._

Jeg har sluttet min Bog; jeg har sluttet alt, hvad her var for mig
at virke.

Iaftes, da jeg paa det sidste Blad havde lukket Grethes Øjne med et
Afskedskys og det tomme hvide Papir laa foran mig, da forstod jeg,
at nu kom først ret de ensomme Dage paa Vejrbakken. Og jeg stod op,
samlede alle Ting sammen, pakkede min Kuffert og lod min Vært vide,
at jeg rejser med Skibet imorgen.

Hvad jeg vil? Først og fremmest bort herfra. Men dernæst didhen,
hvor Arbejdet venter mig. Træt, fordi det syntes mig at føre
til intet, opgav jeg det. Jeg genoptager det, uden altfor store
Indbildninger, men følende, at det i hvert Fald har sit Værd i
sig selv. Hvilen giver kun de Lykkelige Fred. For os andre dulmer
Arbejdet Ulykken.

Lad mig desuden tilstaa det. Naar jeg i disse sidste Tider af og
til, for at søge en Smule Adspredelse, har gæstet en af Byens Kaféer
og dér faaet et Blad ihænde, er der vaagnet i mig en kriblende Lyst
til atter at føre en Pen for eller imod det, jeg læste. Jeg fornam,
at min Mølle ikke var standset anderledes, end at en Smule Vind
kunde sætte den i Bevægelse. Og jeg syntes, jeg begyndte at forstaa
Grethes Fader. Ikke Møllen, men ham var det, der trængte til at
høre Hjulene snurre og Vingerne suse. I hans eget Indre var det, at
Anklagen mod Hvilen lød. Jeg syntes, jeg forstod endnu mere. Jeg
hørte Varselraabet: Ve den, der i Blinde lader Møllen gaa!

Idag har jeg været rundt at tage Afsked. Med Byen, med Vejrbakken,
med alt det, der for mig gemmer Livets lyseste og bitreste Minder.

Jeg har sagt min Veninde i Stiftelsen Farvel. Hendes Trofasthed
overgav jeg Grethes Grav i Værn og Varetægt. Thi jeg véd, at den
gamle Møller ikke kommer der før den Dag, han selv bringes derud
til evig Hvile. Jeg sagde til min Veninde: »Smyk ikke Graven med
de forgængelige Blomster, dem, hvis Trøst er en stakket pralende
Løgn; dæk den med det altid levende Mindes beskedne Vækster, med
Vedbend og Evighedsblomster.« Min Veninde gav grædende sit Løfte:
»Hendes Grav skal staa smykket, som han vil det, saalænge Gud lader
mig leve. Og falder jeg fra, vil de Andre herinde gøre, som jeg har
gjort. Den Tid blot En er tilbage, der har set hendes velsignede
Ansigt, skal hendes Grav ikke forfalde, det kan han stole paa.«

Hos Grethes Fader var jeg. Jeg fandt ham mere meddelsom end ellers
siden Ulykken. Efterretningen om min Afrejse syntes intet Indtryk
at gøre paa ham. Hvad var jeg vel ogsaa for ham uden i Forbindelse
med Grethe? Han fortalte mig, at han havde fæstet den gamle Kone,
der før gik til Haande i Huset, til at bo hos sig og passe ham.
For ham var der da sørget, det, han behøvede. Om at flytte fra
Vejrbakken vilde han ikke høre Tale. Mindre nu end nogensinde. Thi
nu -- fortalte han mig videre -- var det »i Orden« med Møllen.
Istedetfor at rive den ned havde han indrettet den til et Sørgeminde
over Grethe. Alt Maskineriet havde han ladet hugge isønder, og,
naglede fast til Bygningen, stod Vingerne som et oprejst Kors ud
mod Fjorden. »Hverken den eller jeg« -- sagde han -- »kan nu gøre
mere Fortræd her i Livet. Vi bliver her sammen paa det Sted, hvor
vi forbrød os. Og saa er det jo min Tanke, at Møllen, naar jeg dør,
skal gives i Arv og Eje som Sømærke og nævnes paa Kortet som Grethes
Minde.«

Jeg gik fra Møllerhuset gennem Haven. Den stod i sin fejre
Foraarspragt, men det skønnedes tydeligt, at Ingen længer tænkte paa
at røgte den. Græsset paa Plænerne groede vildt og uslaaet, i Bedene
voksede Ukrudt frodigt mellem Blomsterne. Jeg forudsaa den Dag,
hvor den vilde forfalde til Vildnis og dernæst atter blive et Bytte
for den golde Vestenvind. Kærlighedens og Fredens milde Haand var
vegen fra Vejrbakkens Oase.

Tilsidst var jeg paa Kirkegaarden. Hos hende, der var min
Barndoms Sol og hos hende, der lod denne Sol genlyse en kort, men
uforglemmelig Dag over min Manddom.

I to gode Mødre, sov i Fred ved hinandens Side paa min gamle Bys
Kirkegaard.

-- -- Min Kuffert er pakket. Men øverst i den ligger en af de smaa
Skjorter, Grethe syede til vor Søn.




XL.


                                                _1. Maj. Ombord._

Skibet gled ud af Havnen, forbi Slottet med den hverdagsagtige graa
Façade, udenom Brohovedet, hvor min gamle Veninde stod og viftede
Farvel. Bag mig laa nu Byen, smilende rød mellem foraarsgrønne
Marker og Bakker, med munter Røg fra alle Skorstene og med
Storkeknebren over Tagene. Langsomt blegnede den i Aftenens Dis.
Skibet svingede om en Pynt, forsvunden var Byen.

Jeg vaagnede, som om Tæppet var gaaet ned for et Skuespil, i hvis
fjærne Drømmeverden jeg for en kort Stund havde levet. Da fulgte
Skibet en ny Drejning af Fjorden, og et eneste Øjeblik saa' jeg, ude
i Horisonten, Vejrbakkens Top og øverst oppe Møllen som et sort
Kors paa hvid Grund.

Saa er den gamle By uigenkaldelig borte. Og jeg vender tilbage,
derfra jeg kom. Til gamle Venner og gamle Fjender.

Har da dette Aar været forgæves, er det sporløst svundet som den
Æventyrets Drømmeverden, for hvilken Teatrets Tæppe ruller ned?

Visselig ikke. Det har bragt mig den _Treuga Dei_, hvorefter den
ganske Jord sukker, den Guds Fred, som selv vore krigeriske Fædre
undte hinanden, den livsalige Forsoning med sig selv og Andre, der
lutrer Sjælen og ædler Viljen. Jeg drager tilbage, hvorfra jeg kom,
men ikke som den samme. Jeg har, hvad jeg manglede før, et højt og
sikkert Mærke for min Sejlads: Grethes Minde. Mine Venner vil maaske
modtage mig med et medlidende Skuldertræk, mine Fjender maaske sende
mig et hoverende Smil. De vil erfare, at der er Grund hverken til
Medynk eller Glæde. Den Guds Fred, der har rørt min Sjæl, har ikke
haft Brug for nogen Omvendelse; det Sømærke, mit Liv har vundet,
fører mig ikke i nogen ny Retning. Blot følger jeg nu sikrere en
ligere Vej.

Paa dit Dødsleje, Grethe, bebrejdede Du Dig, at Du døde som Jomfru
i mine Arme. Jeg tvivlede ingensinde om din redebonne Gavmildhed.
Jomfru eller Ikke-Jomfru, Du var bleven den samme. Jeg véd ogsaa,
at ingen Salighed vilde været større end at hvile som Brudgom ved
din Side. Men Du, min Jomfrubrud, har lært mig Forsagelsens hidtil
ukendte Lykke. Du har lært mig Lykken ved at være paa Vej til
Lykken, selv om man aldrig naaer den.

Jeg sætter atter Møllen i Gang. Det maa saa være. Den kræver sin Ret
af min Ungdom og mine Evner. Og jeg tænker paa, at den Møllevinge,
der dræbte Dig, maaske ikke fortjener Forbandelse. Langt snarere
handlede den maaske mildt og godt, da den i Blinde tog Dig bort,
inden den forfærdelige Stund oprandt, da jeg, uden at _ville_ se,
satte i Gang min Mølle, ved hvis Vinger Du havde søgt Hvile.
»Grethes Minde« har lært mig at se mig for.

Min Drøm er til Ende. I Foraarsnatten bærer Skibet mig tilbage fra
min gamle By til Virkeligheden og Arbejdet. Drømmen er til Ende,
Guds Fred udrunden, Grethe død.

Eller var det ingen Drøm? Eller drømmer jeg endnu? Jeg synes at
fornemme, mens jeg skriver dette, Grethes Haand paa min Skulder, at
høre hende hviske i mit Øre:

Guds Fred udrinder aldrig for den, der elsker.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Guds Fred, by Peter Nansen

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GUDS FRED ***

***** This file should be named 43295-8.txt or 43295-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/3/2/9/43295/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from scanned
images of public domain material from the Google Print
project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

The couple came back to Ayodhya, where Rama was crowned king with Sita by his side. While Rama's trust and affection for Sita never wavered, it soon became evident that some people in Ayodhya could not accept Sita's long captivity under the power of Ravana.


Sita returns to the Earth's womb with her mother as Rama, her sons and sages watch in astonishment.
During Rama's period of rule, an intemperate washerman, while berating his wayward wife, declared that he was "no pusillanimous Rama who would take his wife back after she had lived in the house of another man". This statement was reported back to Rama, who knew that the accusation of Sita was baseless. Nevertheless, he would not let slander undermine his rule, so he sent Sita away.
Thus Sita was thus forced into exile a second time; she was not only alone this time but also pregnant. Abandoned Sita wandered about in the forest and at last reached the hermitage of Valmiki who gave her refuge in his hermitage, where she delivered twin sons named Kusha and Luv or Lava. The other hermits discouraged Valmiki giving Sita shelter and protection and saying, "Sita is impure, otherwise her husband would not have abandoned her".[2]
In the hermitage, Sita raised her sons alone, as a single mother.[8] They grew up to be valiant and intelligent, and were eventually united with their father. Once she had witnessed the acceptance of her children by Rama, Sita sought final refuge in the arms of her mother Bhūmi. Hearing her plea for release from an unjust world and from a life that had rarely been happy, the earth dramatically split open; Bhūmi appeared and took Sita away to a better world.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of Seven Wives and Seven Prisons, by L.A. Abbott

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Seven Wives and Seven Prisons

Author: L.A. Abbott

Release Date: November, 2003  [Etext #4667]
Posting Date: January 27, 2010

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SEVEN WIVES AND SEVEN PRISONS ***




Produced by Charles Aldarondo





SEVEN WIVES AND SEVEN PRISONS

Or Experiences In The Life Of A Matrimonial Maniac. A True Story.
Written By Himself.


By L.A. Abbott


New York:

Published For The Author. 1870.



CONTENTS


CHAPTER 1. THE FIRST AND WORST WIFE My Early History. The First
Marriage. Leaving Home to Prospect. Sending for My Wife. Her Mysterious
Journey. Where I Found Her. Ten Dollars for Nothing. A Fascinating Hotel
Clerk. My Wife's Confession. From Bad to Worse. Final Separation. Trial
for Forgery. A Private Marriage. Summary Separation.

CHAPTER II. MISERIES FROM MY SECOND MARRIAGE. Love-Making in
Massachusetts. Arrest for Bigamy. Trial at Northampton. A Stunning
Sentence. Sent to State Prison. Learning the Brush Business. Sharpening
Picks. Prison Fare. In the Hospital. Kind Treatment. Successful
Horse-Shoeing. The Warden my Friend. Efforts for my Release. A Full
Pardon.

CHAPTER III. THE SCHEIMER SENSATION. The Scheimer Family. In Love
With Sarah. Attempt to Elope. How it was Prevented. Second Attempt. A
Midnight Expedition. The Alarm. A Frightful Beating. Escape, Flogging
the Devil out of Sarah. Return to New Jersey. "Boston Yankee." Plans to
Secure Sarah.

CHAPTER IV. SUCCESS WITH SARAH. Mary Smith as a Confederate. The Plot.
Waiting in the Woods. The Spy Outwitted. Sarah Secured. The Pursuers
Baffled. Night on the Road. Efforts to Get Married. "The Old Offender."
Married at Last. A Constable after Sarah. He Gives it Up. An Ale Orgie.
Return to "Boston Yankee's." A Home in Goshen.

CHAPTER V. HOW THE SCHEIMERS MADE ME SUFFER. Return to Scheimer's.
Peace, and then Pandemonium. Frightful Family Row. Running for Refuge.
The Gang Again. Arrest at Midnight. Struggle with my Captors. In Jail
Once More. Put in Irons. A Horrible Prison. Breaking Out. The Dungeon.
Sarah's Baby.. Curious Compromises. Old Scheimer my Jailer. Signing a
Bond. Free Again. Last Words from Sarah.

CHAPTER VI. FREE LIFE AND FISHING. Taking Care of Crazy Men. Carrying
off a Boy. Arrested for Stealing my Own Horse and Buggy. Fishing in Lake
Winnepisiogee. An Odd Landlord. A Woman as Big as a Hogshead. Reducing
the Hogshead to a Barrel. Wonderful Verification of a Dream. Successful
Medical Practice. A Busy Winter in New Hampshire. Blandishments of
Captain Brown. I go to Newark, New Jersey.

CHAPTER VII. WEDDING A WIDOW AND THE CONSEQUENCES. I Marry a Widow.
Six Weeks of Happiness. Confiding a Secret, and the Consequences. The
Widow's Brother. Sudden Flight from Newark. In Hartford, Conn. My
Wife's Sister Betrays Me. Trial for Bigamy. Sentenced to Ten Years'
Imprisonment. I Become a "Bobbin Boy." A Good Friend. Governor Price
Visits me in Prison. He Pardons Me. Ten Years' Sentence Fulfilled in
Seven Months.

CHAPTER VIII. ON THE KEEN SCENT. Good Resolutions. Enjoying Freedom.
Going After a Crazy Man. The Old Tempter in a New Form. Mary Gordon.
My New "Cousin." Engaged Again. Visit to the Old Folks at Home. Another
Marriage. Starting for Ohio. Change of Plans. Domestic Quarrels.
Unpleasant Stories about Mary. Bound Over to Keep the Peace. Another
Arrest for Bigamy. A Sudden Flight. Secreted Three Weeks in a Farm
House. Recaptured at Concord. Escaped Once More. Traveling on the
Underground Railroad. In Canada.

CHAPTER IX. MARRYING TWO MILLINERS. Back in Vermont. Fresh Temptations.
Margaret Bradley. Wine and Women. A Mock Marriage in Troy. The False
Certificate. Medicine and Millinery. Eliza Gurnsey. A Spree at Saratoga.
Marrying Another Milliner. Again Arrested for Bigamy. In Jail Eleven
Months. A Tedious Trial. Found Guilty. Appeal to Supreme Court. Trying
to Break Out of Jail. A Governor's Promise. Second Trial. Sentenced to
Three Years' Imprisonment.

CHAPTER X. PRISON LIFE IN VERMONT. Entering Prison. The Scythe Snath
Business. Blistered Hands. I Learn Nothing. Threaten to Kill the Shop
Keeper. Locksmithing. Open Rebellion. Six Weeks in the Dungeon. Escape
of a Prisoner. In the Dungeon Again. The Mad Man Hall. He Attempts
to Murder the Deputy. I Save Morey's Life. Howling in the Black Hole.
Taking Off Hall's Irons. A Ghastly Spectacle. A Prison Funeral. I am Let
Alone. The Full Term of my Imprisonment.

CHAPTER XI. ON THE TRAMP. The Day of my Deliverance. Out of Clothes.
Sharing with a Beggar. A Good Friend. Tramping Through the Snow. Weary
Walks. Trusting to Luck. Comfort at Concord. At Meredith Bridge. The
Blaisdells. Last of the "Blossom" Business. Making Money at Portsmouth.
Revisiting Windsor. An Astonished Warden. Making Friends of Enemies.
Inspecting the Prison. Going to Port Jervis.

CHAPTER XII. ATTEMPT TO KIDNAP SARAH SCHEIMER'S BOY. Starting to See
Sarah. The Long Separation. What I Learned About Her. Her Drunken
Husband. Change of Plan. A Suddenly-Formed Scheme. I Find Sarah's Son.
The First Interview. Resolve to Kidnap the Boy. Remonstrance of my Son
Henry. The Attempt. A Desperate Struggle. The Rescue. Arrest of Henry.
My Flight into Pennsylvania. Sending Assistance to my Son. Return to
Port Jervis. Bailing Henry. His Return to Belvidere. He is Bound Over to
be Tried for Kidnapping. My folly.

CHAPTER XIII. ANOTHER WIDOW. Waiting for the Verdict. My Son Sent to
State Prison. What Sarah Would Have Done. Interview with my First Wife.
Help for Henry. The Biddeford Widow. Her Effort to Marry Me. Our Visit
to Boston. A Warning. A Generous Gift. Henry Pardoned. Close of the
Scheimer Account. Visit to Ontario County. My Rich Cousins. What Might
Have Been. My Birthplace Revisited.

CHAPTER XIV. MY SON TRIES TO MURDER ME. Settling Down in Maine. Henry's
Health. Tour Through the South. Secession Times. December in New
Orleans. Up the Mississippi. Leaving Henry in Massachusetts. Back in
Maine Again. Return to Boston, Profitable Horse-Trading. Plenty of
Money. My First Wife's Children. How they Have Been Brought Up. A
Barefaced Robbery. Attempt to Blackmail Me. My Son Tries to Rob and Kill
Me. My Rescue Last of the Young Man.

CHAPTER XV. A TRUE WIFE AND HOME AT LAST. Where Were All my Wives? Sense
of Security. An Imprudent Acquaintance. Moving from Maine. My Property
in Rensselaer County. How I Lived. Selling a Recipe. About Buying a
Carpet. Nineteen Lawsuits. Sudden Departure for the West. A Vagabond
Life for Two Years. Life in California. Return to the East. Divorce from
any First Wife. A Genuine Marriage. My Farm. Home at Last.




SEVEN WIVES AND SEVEN PRISONS



CHAPTER I. THE FIRST AND WORST WIFE

My Early History--THE FIRST MARRIAGE--LEAVING HOME TO PROSPECT--SENDING
FOR MY WIFE--HER MYSTERIOUS JOURNEY--WHERE I FOUND HER--TEN DOLLARS FOR
NOTHING--A FASCINATING HOTEL CLERK--MY WIFE'S CONFESSION--FROM BAD TO
WORSE--FINAL SEPARATION--TRIAL FOR FORGERY--A PRIVATE MARRIAGE--SUMMARY
SEPARATION.



SOME one has said that if any man would faithfully write his
autobiography, giving truly his own history and experiences, the ills
and joys, the haps and mishaps that had fallen to his lot, he could not
fail to make an interesting story; and Disraeli makes Sidonia say
that there is romance in every life. How much romance, as well as sad
reality, there is in the life of a man who, among other experiences,
has married seven wives, and has been seven times in prison--solely on
account of the seven wives, may be learned from the pages that follow.

I was born in the town of Chatham, Columbia County, New York, in
September, 1813. My father was a New Englander, who married three times,
and I was the eldest son of his third wife, a woman of Dutch descent,
or, as she would have boosted if she had been rich, one of the
old Knickerbockers of New York. My parents were simply honest,
hard--working, worthy people, who earned a good livelihood, brought up
their children to work, behaved themselves, and were respected by their
neighbors. They had a homestead and a small farm of thirty acres, and on
the place was a blacksmith shop in which my father worked daily, shoeing
horses and cattle for farmers and others who came to the shop from miles
around.

There were three young boys of us at home, and we had a chance to go to
school in the winter, while during the summer we worked on the little
farm and did the "chores" about the house and barn. But by the time I
was twelve years old I began to blow and strike in the blacksmith
shop, and when I was sixteen years old I could shoe horses well, and
considered myself master of the trade. At the age of eighteen, I went
into business with my father, and as I was now entitled to a share
of the profits, I married the daughter of a well-to-do neighboring
farmer, and we began our new life in part of my father's house, setting
up for ourselves, and doing our own house-keeping.

I ought to have known then that marrying thus early in life, and
especially marrying the woman I did, was about the most foolish thing
I could do. I found it out afterwards, and was frequently and painfully
reminded of it through many long years. But all seemed bright enough
at the start. My wife was a good-looking woman of just my own age; her
family was most respectable; two of her brothers subsequently became
ministers of the gospel; and all the children had been carefully brought
up. I was thought to have made a good match; but a few years developed
that had wedded a most unworthy woman.

Seventeen months after our marriage, our oldest child, Henry, was born.
Meanwhile we had gone to Sidney, Delaware County, where my father opened
a shop. I still continued in business with him, and during our stay at
Sidney, my daughter, Elizabeth, was born. From Sidney, my father wanted
to go to Bainbridge, Chenango, County, N.Y., and I went with him,
leaving my wife and the children at Sidney, while we prospected. As
usual my father started a blacksmith-shop; but I bought a hundred acres
of timber land, went to lumbering, and made money. We had a house about
four miles from the village, I living with my father, and as soon as
found out that we were doing well in business, I sent to Sidney for
my wife and children. They were to come by stage, and were due, after
passing through Bainbridge, at our house at four o'clock in the morning.
We were up early to meet the stage; but when it arrived, the driver told
us that my wife had stopped at the public house in Bainbridge.

Wondering what this could mean, I at once set out with my brother and
walked over to the village. It was daylight when we arrived, and knocked
loudly at the public house door. After considerable delay, the clerk
came to the door and let us in. He also asked as to "take something,"
which we did. The clerk knew us well, and I inquired if my wife was in
the house; he said she was, told us what room she was in, and we went up
stairs and found her in bed with her children. Waking her, I asked her
why she did not come home, in the stage? She replied that the clerk down
stairs told her that the stage did not go beyond the house, and that she
expected to walk over, as soon as it was daylight, or that possibly we
might come for her.


Albert Einstein was born in Ulm, in the Kingdom of Württemberg in the German Empire on 14 March 1879.[10] His father was Hermann Einstein, a salesman and engineer. His mother was Pauline Einstein (née Koch). In 1880, the family moved to Munich, where his father and his uncle founded Elektrotechnische Fabrik J. Einstein & Cie, a company that manufactured electrical equipment based on direct current.[10]
The Einsteins were non-observant Jews. Albert attended a Catholic elementary school from the age of five for three years. At the age of eight, he was transferred to the Luitpold Gymnasium (now known as the Albert Einstein Gymnasium) where he received advanced primary and secondary school education until he left Germany seven years later.[11] Contrary to popular suggestions that he had struggled with early speech difficulties, the Albert Einstein Archives indicate he excelled at the first school that he attended.[12] He was right-handed;[12][13] there appears to be no evidence for the widespread popular belief[14] that he was left-handed.
His father once showed him a pocket compass; Einstein realized that there must be something causing the needle to move, despite the apparent "empty space".[15] As he grew, Einstein built models and mechanical devices for fun and began to show a talent for mathematics.[10] When Einstein was ten years old, Max Talmud (later changed to Max Talmey), a poor Jewish medical student from Poland, was introduced to the Einstein family by his brother. During weekly visits over the next five years, he gave the boy popular books on science, mathematical texts and philosophical writings. These included Immanuel Kant's Critique of Pure Reason, and Euclid's Elements (which Einstein called the "holy little geometry book").[16][17][fn 1]
In 1894, his father's company failed: direct current (DC) lost the War of Currents to alternating current (AC). In search of business, the Einstein family moved to Italy, first to Milan and then, a few months later, to Pavia. When the family moved to Pavia, Einstein stayed in Munich to finish his studies at the Luitpold Gymnasium. His father intended for him to pursue electrical engineering, but Einstein clashed with authorities and resented the school's regimen and teaching method. He later wrote that the spirit of learning and creative thought were lost in strict rote learning. At the end of December 1894, he travelled to Italy to join his family in Pavia, convincing the school to let him go by using a doctor's note.[19] It was during his time in Italy that he wrote a short essay with the title "On the Investigation of the State of the Ether in a Magnetic Field."[20][21]
In 1895, at the age of sixteen, Einstein sat the entrance examinations for the Swiss Federal Polytechnic in Zurich (later the Eidgenössische Polytechnische Schule). He failed to reach the required standard in several subjects, but obtained exceptional grades in physics and mathematics.[22] On the advice of the Principal of the Polytechnic, he attended the Aargau Cantonal School in Aarau, Switzerland, in 1895–96 to complete his secondary schooling. While lodging with the family of Professor Jost Winteler, he fell in love with Winteler's daughter, Marie. (Albert's sister Maja later married Wintelers' son Paul.)[23] In January 1896, with his father's approval, he renounced his citizenship in the German Kingdom of Württemberg to avoid military service.[24] (He acquired Swiss citizenship five years later, in February 1901.)[25] In September 1896, he passed the Swiss Matura with mostly good grades (including a top grade of 6 in physics and mathematical subjects, on a scale of 1-6),[26] and, though only seventeen, enrolled in the four-year mathematics and physics teaching diploma program at the ETH Zurich. Marie Winteler moved to Olsberg, Switzerland for a teaching post.
Einstein's future wife, Mileva Marić, also enrolled at the Polytechnic that same year, the only woman among the six students in the mathematics and physics section of the teaching diploma course. Over the next few years, Einstein and Marić's friendship developed into romance, and they read books together on extra-curricular physics in which Einstein was taking an increasing interest. In 1900, Einstein was awarded the Zurich Polytechnic teaching diploma, but Marić failed the examination with a poor grade in the mathematics component, theory of functions.[27] There have been claims that Marić collaborated with Einstein on his celebrated 1905 papers,[28][29] but historians of physics who have studied the issue find no evidence that she made any substantive contributions.[30][31][32][33]


I declare, I was so young and unsophisticated that I suspected nothing,
and blamed only the stupidity, as I supposed, of the clerk in telling
her that the stage did not go beyond Bainbridge. My wife got up and
dressed herself and the children, and then as it was broad daylight,
after endeavoring, ineffectually, to get a conveyance, we started for
home on foot, she leading the little boy, and I carrying the youngest
child. We were not far on our way when she suddenly stopped, stooped
down, and exclaimed:


"O! see what I have found in the road."

And she showed me a ten dollar bill. I was quite surprised, and
verdantly enough, advised looking around for more money, which my wife,
brother and I industriously did for some minutes. It was full four weeks
before I found out where that ten dollar bill came from. Meanwhile, my
wife was received and was living in her new home, being treated with
great kindness by all of us. It was evident, however, that she had
something on her mind which troubled her, and one morning, about a
month after her arrival, I found her in tears. I asked her what was the
matter? She said that she had been deceiving me; that she did not pick
up the ten dollar bill in the road; but that it was given to her by the
clerk in the public house in Bainbridge; only, however, for this: he
had grossly insulted her; she had resented it, and he had given her the
money, partly as a reparation, and partly to prevent her from speaking
of the insult to me or to others.

But by this time my hitherto blinded eyes were opened, and I charged
her with being false to me. She protested she had not been; but finally
confessed that she had been too intimate with the clerk at the hotel.
I began a suit at law against the clerk; but finally, on account of my
wife's family and for the sake of my children, I stopped proceedings,
the clerk paying the costs of the suit as far as it had gone, and giving
me what I should probably have got from him in the way of damages. My
wife too, was apparently so penitent, and I was so much infatuated with
her, that I forgave her, and even consented to continue to live with
her. But I removed to Greenville, Greene County, N. Y., where I went
into the black-smithing business, and was very successful. We lived
here long enough to add two children to our little family; but as time
went on, the woman became bad again, and displayed the worst depravity.
I could no longer live with her, and we finally mutually agreed upon
a life-long separation--she insisting upon keeping the children, and
going to Rochester where she subsequently developed the full extent of
her character.

This, as nearly as I remember, was in the year 1838, and with this came
a new trouble upon me. Just before the separation, I received from my
brother's wife a note for one hundred dollars, and sold it. It proved to
be a forgery. I was temporarily in Troy, N. Y., when the discovery
was made, and as I made no secret of my whereabouts at any time, I was
followed to Troy, was there arrested, and after lying in jail at Albany
one night, was taken next morning to Coxsackie, Greene County, and front
thence to Catskill. After one day in jail there, I was brought before a
justice and examined on the charge of uttering a forged note. There was
a most exciting trial of four days duration. I had two good lawyers who
did their best to show that I did not know the note to be forged when
I sold it, but the justice seemed determined to bind me over for
trial, and he did so, putting me under five hundred dollars' bonds. My
half-sister at Sidney was sent for, came to Catskill, and became bail
for me. I was released, and my lawyers advised me to leave, which I did
at once, and went to Pittsfield, and from there to Worthington,
Mass., where I had another half-sister, who was married to Mr. Josiah
Bartlett, and was well off.

Here I settled down, for all that I knew to the contrary, for life. For
some years past, I had devoted my leisure hours from the forge to
the honest endeavor to make up for the deficiencies in my youthful
education, and had acquired, among other things, a good knowledge
of medicine. I did not however, believe in any of the "schools"
particularly those schools that make use of mineral medicines in
their practice. I favored purely vegetable remedies, and had been very
successful in administering them. So I began life anew, in Worthington,
as a Doctor, and aided by my half-sister and her friends, I soon
secured a remunerative practice.

I was beginning to be truly happy. I supposed that the final separation,
mutually agreed upon between my wife and myself, was as effectual as all
the courts in the country could make it, and I looked upon myself as
a free man. Accordingly, after I had been in Worthington some months I
began to pay attentions to the daughter of a flourishing farmer. She was
a fine girl; she received my addresses favorably, and we were finally
privately married. This was the beginning of my life-long troubles. In
a few weeks her father found out that I had been previously married, and
was not, so far as he knew, either a divorced man or a widower. And
so it happened, that one day when I was at his house, and with his
daughter, he suddenly came home with a posse of people and a warrant for
my arrest. I was taken before a justice, and while we were waiting for
proceedings to begin, or, possibly for the justice to arrive, I took the
excited father aside and said:

"You know I have a fine horse and buggy at the door. Get in with me, and
ride down home. I will see your daughter and make everything right with
her, and if you will let me run away, I'll give her her the horse and
buggy."

The offer was too tempting to be refused. The father had the warrant in
his pocket, and he accepted my proposal. We rode to his house, and he
went into the back-room by direction of his daughter while she and I
talked in the hall. I explained matters as well as I could; I promised
to see her again, and that very soon. My horse and buggy were at the
door. Hastily bidding my new and young wife "good-bye," I sprang into
the buggy and drove rapidly away. The father rushed to the door and
raised a great hue and cry, and what was more, raised the neighbors; I
had not driven five miles before all Worthington was after me. But I had
the start, the best horse, and I led in the race. I drove to Hancock,
N.Y., where my pursuers lost the trail; thence to Bennington, Vt., next
to Brattleboro, Vt., and from there to Templeton, Mass. What befel me at
Templeton, shall be related in the next chapter.



CHAPTER II. MISERIES FROM MY SECOND MARRIAGE.

LOVE-MAKING IN MASSACHUSETTS--ARREST FOR BIGAMY--TRIAL AT
NORTHAMPTON--A STUNNING SENTENCE--SENT TO STATE PRISON--LEARNING THE
BRUSH BUSINESS--SHARPENING PICKS--PRISON FARE--IN THE HOSPITAL--KIND
TREATMENT--SUCCESSFUL HORSE SHOEING--THE WARDEN MY FRIEND--EFFORTS FOR
MY RELEASE--A FULL PARDON.



At Templeton I speedily made known my profession, and soon had a very
good medical practice which one or two "remarkable cures" materially
increased. I was doing well and making money. I boarded in a respectable
farmer's family, and after living there about six months there came
another most unhappy occurrence. From the day, almost, when I began
to board with this farmer there sprung up a strong attachment between
myself and his youngest daughter which soon ripened into mutual love.
She rode about with me when I went to see my patients, who were getting
to be numerous, and we were much in each other's company.

On one occasion she accompanied me to Worcester where I had some
patients. We went to a public house where she and her family were well
known, and when she was asked by the landlord how she happened to come
there with the doctor, her prompt answer was:

"Why, we are married; did'nt you know it?"

She refused even to go to the table without my attendance, and when I
was out visiting some patients, she waited for her meals till I came
back. We stayed there but two days and returned together to Templeton.

A month afterward her brother was in Worcester, and stopped at this
house. The landlord, after some conversation about general matters,
said:

"So your sister is married to the Doctor?"

"I know nothing about it," was the reply.

This led to a full and altogether too free disclosure to the astonished
brother about the particulars of our visit to the same house a month
before, and his sister's representations that we were married. The
brother immediately started for home, and repeated the story, as it was
told to him, to his father and the family. Without seeing his daughter,
the father at once procured a warrant, and had me arrested and brought
before a justice on charge of seduction. The trial was brief; the
daughter herself swore positively, that though she had been imprudent
and indiscreet in going to Worcester with me, no improper communication
had ever, there or elsewhere, taken place between us.

Of course, there was nothing to do but to let me go and I was
discharged. But out of this affair came the worst that had yet fallen
to my lot in life. The story got into the papers, with particulars and
names of the parties, and in this way the people at Worthington, who had
chased me as far as Hancock and had there lost all trace of me, found
out where I was. If I had been aware of it, they might have looked
elsewhere for me; but while I was felicitating myself upon my escape
from the latest difficulty, down came an officer from Worthington with a
warrant for my arrest. This officer, the sheriff, was connected with the
family into which I had married in Worthington, and with him came two or
three more relatives, all bound, as they boasted, to "put me through."
They were excessively irate against me and very much angered, especially
that their race after me to Hancock had been fruitless. I had fallen
into the worst possible hands.

They took me to Northampton and brought me before a Justice, on a
charge of bigamy: The sheriff who arrested me, and the relatives who
accompanied him were willing to swear my life away, if they could, and
the justice was ready enough to bind me over to take my trial in court,
which was not to be in session for full six months to come. Those long,
weary six months I passed in the county jail. Then came my trial. I had
good counsel. There was not a particle of proof that I was guilty of
bigamy; no attempt was made on the part of the prosecution to produce
my first wife, from whom I had separated, or, indeed, to show that there
was such a woman in existence. But, evidence or no evidence, with all
Worthington against me, conviction was inevitable. The jury found me
guilty. The judge promptly sentenced me to three years' imprisonment in
the State Prison, at Charlestown, with hard labor, the first day to be
passed in solitary confinement.

This severe sentence fairly stunned me. I was taken back to jail, and
the following day I was conveyed to Charlestown with heavy irons on my
ankles and handcuffed. No murderer would have been more heavily ironed.
We started early in the morning, and by noon I was duly delivered to
the warden at Charlestown prison. I was taken into the office, measured,
asked my name, age, and other particulars, and then if I had a trade. To
this I at once answered, "no." I wanted my twenty-four hours'
solitary confinement in which to reflect upon the kind of "hard labor,"
prescribed in my sentence, I was willing to follow for the next three
years; and I also wanted information about the branches of labor pursued
in that prison. The next words of the warden assured me that he was a
kind and compassionate man.

"Go," he said to an officer, "and instantly take off those irons when
you take him inside the prison."

I was taken in and the irons were taken off. I was then undressed, my
clothes were removed to another room, and I was redressed in the prison
uniform. This was a grotesque uniform indeed. The suit was red and blue,
half and half, like a harlequin's, and to crown all came a hat or cap,
like a fool's cap, a foot and a half high and running up to a peak.
Miserable as I was, I could scarcely help smiling at the utterly absurd
appearance I knew I then presented. I even ventured to remark upon it;
but was suddenly and sternly checked with the command:

"Silence! There's no talking allowed here."

Then began my twenty-four hours' solitary confinement, and twenty-four
wretched hours they were. I had only bread and water to eat and drink,
and I need not say that my unhappy thoughts would not permit me to
sleep. At noon next day I was taken from my cell, and brought again
before the warden, Mr. Robinson, who kindly said:

"You have no trade, you say; what do you want to go to work at?"

"Anything light; I am not used to hard labor," I replied.

So the warden directed that I should be put at work in the brush shop,
where all kinds of brushes were made. Mr. Eddy was the officer in charge
of this shop, and Mr. Knowles, the contractor for the labor employed in
the brush business, was present. Both of these gentlemen took pains to
instruct me in the work I was to begin upon, and were very kind in their
manner towards me. I went to work in a bungling way and with a sad and
heavy heart. At 12 o'clock we were marched from the shop to our
cells, each man taking from a trap in the wall, as he went by, his pan
containing his dinner, which consisted, that day, of boiled beef and
potatoes. It was probably the worst dinner I had ever eaten, but I had
yet to learn what prison fare was. From one o'clock to six I was in the
shop again; then came Supper--mush and molasses that evening which was
varied, as I learned afterwards, on different days by rye bread,
or Indian bread and rye coffee. These things were also served for
breakfast, and the dinners were varied on different days in the week.
The fare was very coarse, always, but abundant and wholesome. After
supper prisoners were expected to go to bed, as they were called out at
six o'clock in the morning.

I stayed in the brush shop three or four months, but I made very little
progress in learning the trade. I was willing enough to learn and did my
best. From the day I entered the prison I made up my mind to behave as
well as I could; to be docile and obedient, and to comply with every
rule and order. Consequently I had no trouble, and the officers all
treated me kindly. Warden Robinson was a model man for his position. He
believed that prisoners could be reformed more easily by mild than by
harsh measures--at least they would be more contented with their lot and
would be subordinate. Every now and then he would ask prisoners if they
were well treated by the officers; how they were getting on; if they had
enough to eat, and so on. The officers seemed imbued with the warden's
spirit; the chaplain of the prison, who conducted the Sunday, services
and also held a Sunday school, was one of the finest men in the world,
and took a personal interest in every prisoner. Altogether, it was
a model institution. But in spite of good treatment I was intensely
miserable; my mind was morbid; I was nearly, if not quite, insane; and
one day during the dinner hour, I opened a vein in each arm in hopes
that I should bleed to death. Bleed I did, till I fainted away, and as
I did not come out when the other prisoners did, the officer came to
my cell and discovered my condition. He at once sent for the Doctor who
came and stopped the hemorrhage, and then sent me to the hospital where
I remained two weeks.

After I came out of the hospitals the Warden talked to me about my
situation and feelings. He advised me to go into the blacksmith shop,
of course not dreaming that I knew anything of the work; but he said I
would have more liberty there; that the men moved about freely and could
talk to each other; that the work mainly was sharpening picks and tools,
and that I could at least blow and strike. So I went into the blacksmith
shop, and remained their six weeks. But, debilitated as I was, the work
was too hard for me, and so the warden put me in the yard to do what I
could. I also swept the halls and assisted in the cook-room. One day
when the warden spoke to me, I told him that I knew something about
taking care of the sick, and after some conversation, he transferred me
to the hospital as a nurse.

Here, if there is such a things as contentment in prison, I was
comparatively happy. I nursed the sick and administered medicines under
direction of the doctor. I had too, with all easy position, more liberty
than any other prisoner. I could go anywhere about the halls and yard,
and in a few weeks I was frequently sent on an errand into the town.
Everyone seemed to have the fullest confidence in me. The Warden talked
to me whenever he saw me, and always had some kind word for me. One day
I ventured to speak to him about his horse, of which he was very proud,
and indeed the horse was a very fine one.

Mr. Warden, said I "that's a noble horse of yours; but he interferes
badly, and that is only because he is badly shod. If you will trust me,
I can shoe him so as to prevent all that."

"Can you?" exclaimed the Warden in great surprise; "Well, if you can,
I'll give you a good piece of bread and butter, or, anything else you
want."

"I don't want your bread and butter," said I "but I will shoe your horse
as he has never been shod before."

"Well take the horse to the shop and see what you can do."

Of course, I knew that by "bread and butter" the warden meant that if I
could shoe his favorite horse so as to prevent him from interfering, he
would gladly favor me as far as he could; and I knew, too, that I could
make as good a shoe as any horse need wear. I gladly led the horse to
the shop where I had so signally failed in pick and tool sharpening, and
was received with jeers by my old comrades who wanted to know what I was
going to do to that horse.

"O, simply shoe him," I said.

This greatly increased the mirth of my former shopmates; but their
amusement speedily changed to amazement as they saw me make my nails,
turn the shoes and neatly put them on. In due time the horse was shod,
and I led him to the Warden for inspection; and before him and an
officer who stood by him, I led the horse up and down to show that he
did not interfere. The Warden's delight was unbounded; he never saw such
a set of shoes; he declared that they fitted as if they had grown to the
horse's hoofs. I need not say that from that day till the day I left the
prison, I had everything I wanted from the Warden's own table; I fared
as well as he did, and had favors innumerable.

About once a month I shod that horse, little thinking that he was to
carry me over my three years' imprisonment in just half that time. Yet
so it was. For talking now almost daily, in the hospital or in the
yard, with the Warden, he became interested in me, and in answer to his
inquiries I told him the whole story of my persecution, as I considered
it, my trial and my unjust and severe sentence. When he had heard all he
said:

"You ought not to be here another day; you ought to go out."

The good chaplain also interested himself in my case, and after hearing
the story, he and the Warden took a lawyer named Bemis, into their
counsel, laid the whole matter before him and asked his opinion. Mr.
Bemis, after hearing all the circumstances, expressed the belief that I
might get a pardon. He entered into the matter with his whole heart. He
sent for my son Henry and my first wife, and they came and corroborated
my statement about the mutual agreement for separation, and told how
long we had been parted. Mr. Bemis and they then went to Governor
Briggs, and told him the story, and that I had served out half of
my severe sentence, and pressed for a pardon. The Governor after due
deliberation consented to their request. They came back to Charlestown
with the joyful intelligence. Warden Robinson advised my son, that
considering my present mental and physical condition, he had better
break the intelligence gradually to me, and so Henry came to me and
said, simply, that he thought he would soon have "good news" for me. The
next day I was told that my pardon was certain. The day following, at 12
o'clock, I walked out, after eighteen months' imprisonment, a free man.
I was in the streets of Charlestown with my own clothes on and five
dollars, given to me by the Warden, in my pocket, I was poor, truly, but
I was at liberty, and that for the day was enough.



CHAPTER III. THE SCHEIMER SENSATION.

THE SCHEIMER FAMILY--IN LOVE WITH SARAH--ATTEMPT TO ELOPE--HOW IT WAS
PREVENTED--THE SECOND ATTEMPT--A MIDNIGHT EXPEDITION--THE ALARM--A
FRIGHTFUL BEATING--ESCAPE--FLOGGING THE DEVIL OUT OF SARAH--WINTER IN
NEW HAMPSHIRE--RETURN TO NEW JERSEY--"BOSTON YANKEE"--PLANS TO SECURE
SARAH.



I went at once to the Prisoners Home, where I was kindly received, and
I stayed there two days. The superintendent then paid my passage to
Pittsfield where I wished to go and meet my son. From Pittsfield I went
to Albany, then New York, and from there to Newtown N. J. Here I went
into practice, meeting with almost immediate success, and staid there
two months. It was my habit to go from town to town to attend to cases
of a certain class and to sell my vegetable preparations; and from
Newtown I went to Belvidere, stopping at intermediate towns on the way,
and from Belvidere I went to Harmony, a short distance below, to attend
a case of white swelling, which I cured.

Now just across the Delaware river, nine miles above Easton, Penn.,
lived a wealthy Dutch farmer, named Scheimer, who heard of the cure
I had effected in Harmony, and as he had a son, sixteen years of age,
afflicted in the same way, he sent for me to come and see him. I crossed
the river, saw the boy, and at Scheimer's request took up my residence
with him to attend to the case. He was to give me, with my board, five
hundred dollars if I cured the boy; but though the boy recovered under
my treatment, I never received my fee for reasons which will appear
anon. I secured some other practice in the neighborhood, and frequently
visited Easton, Belvidere, Harmony, Oxford, and other near by places, on
either side of the river.

Gandhi initially favoured offering "non-violent moral support" to the British effort when World War II broke out in 1939, but the Congressional leaders were offended by the unilateral inclusion of India in the war without consultation of the people's representatives. All Congressmen resigned from office.[102] After long deliberations, Gandhi declared that India could not be party to a war ostensibly being fought for democratic freedom while that freedom was denied to India itself. As the war progressed, Gandhi intensified his demand for independence, calling for the British to Quit India in a speech at Gowalia Tank Maidan. This was Gandhi's and the Congress Party's most definitive revolt aimed at securing the British exit from India.[103]
Gandhi was criticised by some Congress party members and other Indian political groups, both pro-British and anti-British. Some felt that not supporting Britain more in its struggle against Nazi Germany was unethical. Others felt that Gandhi's refusal for India to participate in the war was insufficient and more direct opposition should be taken, while Britain fought against Nazism, it continued to refuse to grant India Independence. Quit India became the most forceful movement in the history of the struggle, with mass arrests and violence on an unprecedented scale.[104]
In 1942, although still committed in his efforts to "launch a non-violent movement", Gandhi clarified that the movement would not be stopped by individual acts of violence, saying that the "ordered anarchy" of "the present system of administration" was "worse than real anarchy."[105][106] He called on all Congressmen and Indians to maintain discipline via ahimsa, and Karo ya maro ("Do or die") in the cause of ultimate freedom.[107]


Gandhi and Muhammad Ali Jinnah, Bombay, 1944
Gandhi and the entire Congress Working Committee were arrested in Bombay by the British on 9 August 1942. Gandhi was held for two years in the Aga Khan Palace in Pune. It was here that Gandhi suffered two terrible blows in his personal life. His 50-year old secretary Mahadev Desai died of a heart attack 6 days later and his wife Kasturba died after 18 months imprisonment on 22 February 1944; six weeks later Gandhi suffered a severe malaria attack. He was released before the end of the war on 6 May 1944 because of his failing health and necessary surgery; the Raj did not want him to die in prison and enrage the nation. He came out of detention to an altered political scene—the Muslim League for example, which a few years earlier had appeared marginal, "now occupied the centre of the political stage"[108] and the topic of Jinnah's campaign for Pakistan was a major talking point. Gandhi met Jinnah in September 1944 in Bombay but Jinnah rejected, on the grounds that it fell short of a fully independent Pakistan, his proposal of the right of Muslim provinces to opt out of substantial parts of the forthcoming political union.[109][110]
While the leaders of Congress languished in jail, the other parties supported the war and gained organizational strength. Underground publications flailed at the ruthless suppression of Congress, but it had little control over events.[111] At the end of the war, the British gave clear indications that power would be transferred to Indian hands. At this point Gandhi called off the struggle, and around 100,000 political prisoners were released, including the Congress's leadership.[112]


The Scheimer family consisted of the "old folks" and four sons and four
daughters, the children grown up, for my patient, sixteen years old, was
the youngest. The youngest daughter, Sarah, eighteen years old, was an
accomplished and beautiful girl. Now it would seem as if with my
sad experience I ought by this time, to have turned my back on women
forever. But I think I was a monomaniac on the subject of matrimony.
My first wife had so misused me that it was always in my mind that
some reparation was due me, and that I was fairly entitled to a good
helpmate. The ill-success of my efforts, hitherto, to secure one,
and my consequent sufferings were all lost upon me--experience, bitter
experience, had taught me nothing.

I had not been in the Scheimer family three months before I fell in love
with the daughter Sarah and she returned my passion. She promised to
marry me, but said there was no use in saying anything to her parents
about it; they would never consent on account of the disparity in
our ages, for I was then forty years old; but she would marry me
nevertheless, if we had to run away together. Meanwhile, the old
folks had seen enough of our intimacy to suspect that it might lead to
something yet closer, and one day Mr. Scheimer invited me to leave his
house and not to return. I asked for one last interview with Sarah,
which was accorded, and we then arranged a plan by which she should meet
me the next afternoon at four o'clock at the Jersey ferry, a mile below
the house, when we proposed to quietly cross over to Belvidere and get
married. I then took leave of her and the family and went away.

The next day, at the appointed time, I was at the ferry--Sarah, as I
learned afterwards, left the house at a much earlier hour to "take a
walk" and while she was, foolishly I think, making a circuitous route
to reach the ferry, her father, who suspected that she intended to run
away, went to the ferryman and told him his suspicions, directing him
if Sarah came there by no means to permit her to cross the river.
Consequently when Sarah met me at the ferry, the ferryman flatly refused
to let either of us go over. He knew all about it, he said, and it was
"no go." I had two hundred dollars in my pocket and I offered him any
reasonable sum, if he would only let us cross; but no, he knew the
Scheimers better than he knew me, and their goodwill was worth more
than mine. Here was a block to the game, indeed. I had sent my baggage
forward in the morning to Belvidere; Sarah had nothing but the clothes
she wore, for she was so carefully watched that she could carry or send
nothing away; but she was ready to go if the obstinate ferryman had not
prevented us.

While we were pressing the ferryman to favor us, down came one of
Sarah's brothers with a dozen neighbors, and told her she must return
home or he would carry her back by force. I interfered and said she
should not go. Whereupon one fellow took hold of me and I promptly
knocked him down, and notified the crowd that the first who laid hands
on me, or who attempted to take her home violently, would get a dose
from my pistol which I then exhibited:

"Sarah must go willingly or not at all," said I.

The production of my pistol, the only weapon in the crowd, brought about
a new state of affairs, and the brother and others tried persuasion; but
Sarah stoutly insisted that she would not return. "Now hold on," boys,
said I, "I am going to say something to her." I then took her aside and
told her that there was no use in trying to run away then; that she had
better go home quietly, and tell the folks that she was sorry for what
she had done, that she had broken off with me, and would have nothing
more to do with me; that I would surely see her to-morrow, and then we
could make a new plan. So she announced her willingness to go quietly
home with her brother and she did so. I went to a public house half a
mile below the ferry. That night the gang came down to this house with
the intention of driving me away from the place, or, possibly, of doing
something worse; but while they were howling outside, the landlord sent
me to my room and then went out and told the crowd I had gone away.

The next morning I boldly walked up to Scheimer's house to get a few
books and other things I had left there, and I saw Sarah. I told her
to be ready on the following Thursday night and I would have a ladder
against her window for her to escape by. She promised to be ready.
Meantime, though I had been in the house but a few minutes, some one who
had seen me go in gathered the crowd of the day before, and the first
thing I knew the house was beseiged. Mrs. Scheimer had gone up stairs
for my things. I went out and faced the little mob. I was told to leave
the place or they would kill me. One of Sarah's brothers ran into the
house, brought out a musket and aimed it at me; but it missed fire. I
drew my pistol the crowd keeping well away then, and told him that if he
did not instantly bring that musket to me I would shoot him. He brought
it, and I threw it over the fence, Sarah crying out from the window,
"good! good!" The mob then turned and abused and blackguarded her. Then
the old lady came out, bringing a carpet bag containing my books and
things, asking me to see if "it was all right." I had no disposition
to stop and examine just then; I told the mob I had no other business
there; that I was going away, and to my surprise, I confess, I was
permitted to leave the place unmolested.

It is quite certain the ferryman made no objection to my crossing, and
I went to Belvidere where I remained quietly till the appointed Thursday
night, when I started with a trusty man for Scheimer's. We timed our
journey so as to arrive there at one o'clock in the morning. Ever since
her attempt to elope, Sarah had been watched night and day, and to
prevent her abduction by me, Mr. Scheimer had two or three men in the
house to stand guard at night. Sarah was locked in her room, which is
precisely what we had provided for, for no one in the house supposed
that she could escape by the window. There was a big dog on the
premises, but he and I were old friends, and he seemed very glad to see
me when I came on the ground on this eventful night. Sarah was watching,
and when I made the signal she opened the window and threw out her ready
prepared bundle. Then my man and I set the ladder and she came safely
to the ground. A moment more and we would have stolen away, when, as ill
luck would have it, the ladder fell with a great crash, and the infernal
dog, that a moment before seemed almost in our confidence, set up a howl
and then barked loud enough to wake the dead.

Forthwith issued from the house old Scheimer, two of his sons and his
hired guard--a half dozen in all. There was a time then. The girl was
instantly seized and taken into the house. Then all hands fell upon us
two, and though I and my man fought our best they managed to pound us
nearly to death. The dog, too, in revenge no doubt for the scare the
ladder had given him, or perhaps to show his loyalty to his master,
assisted in routing us, and put in a bite where he could. It is a wonder
we were not killed. Sarah, meanwhile, was calling out from the house,
and imploring them not to murder us. How we ever got away I hardly know
now, but presently we found ourselves in the road running for our lives,
and running also for the carriage we had concealed in the woods, half
a mile above. We reached it, and hastily unhitching and getting in we
drove rapidly for the bridge crossing over to Belvidere. That beautiful
August night had very few charms for us. It would have been different
indeed if I had succeeded in securing my Sarah; and to think of having
the prize in my very grasp, and the losing all!

We reached the hotel in Belvidere at about half-past two o'clock in
the morning, wearied, worn, bruised and disheartened. My man had not
suffered nearly as severely as I had; the bulk of their blows fell upon
me, and I had the sorest body and the worst looking face I had ever
exhibited. I rested one day and then hurried on to New York. Of course,
I had no means of knowing the feelings or condition of the loved girl
from whom I had been so suddenly and so violently parted. I only learned
from an Easton man whom I knew and whom I met in the city, that "Sarah
Scheimer was sick"--that was all; the man said he did'nt know the family
very well, but he had heard that Miss Scheimer had been "out of her
head, if not downright crazy."

Crazy indeed! How mad and how miserable that poor girl was made by her
own family, I did not know till months afterward, and then I had the
terrible story from her own lips. It seems that when her father and his
gang returned from pursuing me, as they did a little way up the road
towards Belvidere, they found her almost frantic. They locked her up in
her room that night with no one to say so much as a kind word to her.
How she passed that night, after the scenes she had witnessed, and the
abuse with which her father and brothers had loaded her before they
thrust her into her prison, may be imagined. The next day she was
wrought up to a frenzy. Her parents pronounced her insane, and called in
a Dutch doctor who examined her and said she was "bewitched!" And this
is the remedy he proposed as a cure; he advised that she should be
soundly flogged, and the devil whipped out of her. Her family, intensely
angered at her for the trouble she had made them, or rather had caused
them to make for themselves, were only too glad to accept the advice.
The old man and two sons carried a sore bruise or two apiece they got
from me the night before, and seized the opportunity to pay them off
upon her. So they stripped her bare, and flogged her till her back was a
mass of welts and cuts, and then put her to bed. That bed she never left
for two months, and then came out the shadow of her former self. But the
Dutch doctor declared that the devil was whipped out of her, and that
she was entirely cured. A few months afterward the family had the best
of reasons for believing that they had whipped the devil into her,
instead of out of her.

After staying in New York a few days, I went to Dover, N.H., where I had
some acquaintances, and where I hoped to get into a medical practice,
which, with the help of my friends, I did very soon. I lived quietly in
that place all winter, earning a good living and laying by some money.
During the whole time I never heard a word from Sarah. I wrote at least
fifty letters to her, but as I learned afterward, and, indeed, surmised
at the time, every one of them was intercepted by her father or
brothers, and she did not know where I was and so could not write to me.
I left Dover in May and went down to New York. I had some business
there which was soon transacted, and early in June I went over to New
Jersey--to Oxford, a small place near Belvidere.

This place I meant to make my base of operations for the new campaign I
had been planning all winter. I "put up" at a public house kept by a man
who was known in the region round about as the "Boston Yankee," for he
migrated from Boston to New Jersey and was doing a thriving business
at hotel keeping in Oxford. What a thorough good-fellow he was will
presently appear. I had been in the hotel four days and had become
pretty intimate with the landlord before I ventured to make inquiries
about what I was most anxious to learn; but finally I asked him if he
knew the Scheimers over the river? He looked at me in a very comical
way, and then broke out:

"Well, I declare, I thought I knew you, you're the chap that tried to
run away with old Scheimer's daughter Sarah, last August; and you're
down here to get her this time, if you can."

I owned up to my identity, but warned Boston Yankee that if he told any
one who I was, or that I was about there, I'd blow his brains out.

"You keep cool," said he, "don't you be uneasy; I'm your friend and the
gal's friend, and I'll help you both all I can; and if you want to carry
off Sarah Scheimer and marry her, I'll tell you how to work it. You see
she has been watched as closely as possible all winter, ever since she
got well, for she was crazy-like, awhile. Well, you could'n't get nearer
to her, first off, than you could to the North Pole; but do you remember
Mary Smith who was servant gal, there when you boarded with Scheimer?" I
remembered the girl well and told him so, and he continued: "Well, I saw
her the other day, and she told me she was living in Easton, and where
she could be found; now, I'll give you full directions and do you take
my horse and buggy to-morrow morning early and go down and see her, and
get her to go over and let Sarah know that you're round; meantime I'll
keep dark; I know my business and you know yours."

I need not say how overjoyed I was to find this new and most unexpected
friend, and how gratefully I accepted his offer. He gave me the street,
house and number where Mary Smith lived and during the evening we
planned together exactly how the whole affair was to be managed, from
beginning to end. I went to bed, but could scarcely sleep; and all night
long I was agitated by alternate hopes and fears for the success of the
scheme of to-morrow.



CHAPTER IV. SUCCESS WITH SARAH.

MARY SMITH AS A CONFEDERATE--THE PLOT--WAITING IN THE WOODS--THE
SPY OUTWITTED--SARAH SECURED--THE PURSUERS BAFFLED--NIGHT ON THE
ROAD--EFFORTS TO GET MARRIED--THE "OLD OFFENDER" MARRIED AT LAST--A
CONSTABLE AFTER SARAH--HE GIVES IT UP--AN ALE ORGIE--RETURN TO "BOSTON
YANKEE'S"--A HOME IN GOSHEN.



It was Saturday morning, and after an early breakfast I was on the road
with Boston Yankee's fast horse; towards Easton. On my arrival there I
had no difficulty in finding Mary Smith, who recognized me at once, and
was very glad to see me. She knew I had come there to learn something
about Sarah; she had seen her only a week ago; she was well again, and
the girls had talked together about me. This was pleasant to hear, and
I at once proposed to Mary to go to Scheimer's and tell Sarah that I
was there; I would give her ten dollars if she would go. "O! she would
gladly serve us both for nothing."

So she made herself ready, got into the buggy, and we started for
Scheimer's. When we were well on the road I said to her:

"Now, Mary, attend carefully to what I say: you will need to be very
cautious in breaking the news to Sarah that I am here; she has already
suffered a great deal on my account, and may be very timid about my
being in the neighborhood; but if she still loves me as you say she
does, she will run any risk to see me, and, if I know her, she will be
glad to go away with me. Now, this is what you must do; you must see her
alone and tell her my plan; here, take this diamond ring; she knows it
well; manage to let her see it on your finger; then tell her that if
she is willing to leave home and marry me, I will be in the woods half a
mile above her house to-morrow afternoon at 5 o'clock, with a horse
and buggy ready to carry her to Belvidere. If she will not, or dare not
come, give her the ring, and tell her we part, good friends, forever."

It was a beautiful afternoon as we drove along the road. We talked about
Sarah and old times, and I made her repeat my instructions over and
over again and she promised to convey every word to Sarah. We neared
Scheimer's house about six o'clock, and when we were a little way from
there I told Mary to get out, so as to excite no suspicions as to who I
was; she did so, and I waited till I saw her go into the house, and then
drove rapidly by towards the Belvidere bridge, and was safely at Oxford
by nightfall. I told my friend, the landlord, what I had done, and he
said that everything was well planned. He also promised to go with me
next day to assist me if necessary, and, said he:

"If everything is all right, do you carry off the girl and I'll walk
up to Belvidere; but don't bring Sarah this way--head toward Water Gap.
When you're married fast and sure, you can come back here as leisurely
as you're a mind to, and nobody can lay a hand upon you or her."

We arranged some other minor details of our expedition and I went to
bed.

The next afternoon at four o'clock I was at the appointed place, and
Boston Yankee was with me. I did not look for Sarah before five o'clock,
so we tied our horse and kept a good watch upon the road. An hour went
by and no Sarah appeared. I told Boston Yankee I did not believe she
would come.

"Don't be impatient; wait a little longer," said my friend.

In twenty minutes we saw emerge, not from Scheimer's house, but from his
eldest son's house, which was still nearer to the place where we were
waiting, three women, two of whom I recognized as Sarah and Mary, and
the third I did not know, nor could I imagine why she was with the other
two; but as I saw them, leaving Boston Yankee in the woods, I drove the
horse down into the road. As Sarah drew near she kissed her hand to me
and came up to the wagon. "Are you ready to go with me?" I asked. "I
am, indeed," was her reply, and I put out my hand to help her into the
buggy. But the third woman caught hold of her dress, tried to prevent
her from getting in, and began to scream so as to attract attention at
Sarah's brother's house. I told the woman to let her go, and threatened
her with my whip. "Get away," shouted Boston Yankee, who had come upon
the scene. "Drive as fast as you can; never mind if you kill the horse."

We started; the woman still shouting for help, and I drove on as rapidly
as the horse would go. When we had gone on a mile or two, I asked
Sarah what all this meant? She told me that the woman was her brother's
servant; that Mary and herself left her father's house a little after
four o'clock to go over and call at her brother's; that just before
five, when she was to meet me, she and Mary proposed to go out for a
walk; that the whole family watched her constantly, and so her brother's
wife told the servant woman to get on her things and go with them.
"You, may be sure," she, added, "that the woman will arouse the whole
neighborhood, and that they will all be after us." I needed no further
hint to push on. We were going toward Water Gap, as Boston Yankee had
advised, and when we were about eight miles on the way, I deemed it
prudent to drive into the woods and to wait till night before going on.
We drove in just off the road, and tied our horse. We were effectually
concealed; our pursuers, if there were any, would be sure to go by us,
and meantime we could talk over our plans for the future. Sarah told me
that when Mary came to the house the night before, she was not at all
surprised to see her, as she occasionally came up from Easton to
make them a little visit, and to stay all night; that she went to the
summer-house with Mary to sit down and talk, and almost immediately saw
the ring on Mary's finger; that when she saw it she at once recognized
it, and asked her: "O! Mary, where did you get that ring?" "Keep
quiet," said Mary: "don't talk loud, or some one may hear you; don't
be agitated; your lover is near, and has sent me to tell you." It was
joyful news to Sarah, and how readily she had acquiesced in my plan for
an elopement was manifest in the fact that she was then by my side.

We bad not been in the woods an hour when, as I anticipated, we heard
our pursuers, we did not know how many there were, drive rapidly by.
"Now we can go on, I suppose," said Sarah. "Oh no, my dear," I replied,
"now is just the time to wait quietly here;" and wait we did till eight
o'clock, when our pursuers, having gone on a few miles, and having seen
or learned nothing of the fugitives, came by again "on the back track."
They must have thought we had turned off into some other road. I waited
a while longer to let our friend's get a little nearer home and further
away from us, and then took the road again toward Water Gap.

We reached Water Gap at midnight, had some supper and fed the horse. We
rested awhile, and then drove leisurely on nine miles further, where we
waited till daylight and crossed the river. We were in no great hurry
now; we were comparatively safe from pursuit. We soon came to a public
house, where we stopped and put out the horse, intending to take
breakfast. While I was inquiring of the landlord if there was a justice
of the peace in the neighborhood, the landlord's wife had elicited from
Sarah the fact of our elopement, who she was, who her folks were, and so
on. The well-meaning landlady advised Sarah to go back home and get
her parents consent before she married. Sarah suggested that the very
impossibility of getting such consent was the reason for her running
away; nor did it appear how she was to go back home alone even if she
desired to. We saw that we could get no help there, so I countermanded
my order for breakfast, offering at the same time to pay for it as if we
had eaten it, ordered out my horse and drove on. After riding some
ten miles we arrived at another public house on the road, and as the
landlord come out to the door I immediately asked him where I could
find a justice of the peace? He laughed, for he at once comprehended the
whole situation, and said:

"Well, well! I am an old offender myself; I ran away with my wife; there
is a justice of the peace two miles from here, and if you'll come in
I'll have him here within an hour."

We had reached the right place at last, for while the landlady was
getting breakfast for us, and doing her best to make us comfortable and
happy, the Old Offender himself took his horse and carriage and went for
the justice. By the time we had finished our breakfast he was back
with him, and Sarah and I were married in "less than no time," the Old
Offender and his wife singing the certificate as witnesses. I never
paid a fee more gladly. We were married now, and all the Scheimers in
Pennsylvania were welcome to come and see us if they pleased.

No Scheimers came that day; but the day following came a deputation from
that family, some half dozen delegates, and with them a constable from
Easton, with a warrant to arrest Sarah for something--I never knew
what--but at any rate he was to take her home if necessary by force. The
Old Offender declined to let these people into his house; Sarah told me
to keep out of the way and she would see what was wanted. Whereupon she
boldly went to the door and greeted those of her acquaintances who were
in the party. The constable knew her, and told her he had come to take
her home. "But what if I refuse to go?" "Well then, I have a warrant
to take you; but if you are married, I have no power over you." Well
married I am, said Sarah, and she produced the certificate, and the
Old Offender and his wife came out and declared that they witnessed the
ceremony.

What was to be done? evidently nothing; only the constable ordered a
whole barrel of ale to treat his posse and any one about tire town who
chose to drink, and the barrel was rolled out on the grass, tapped, and
for a half hour there was a great jollification, which was not exactly
in honor of our wedding, but which afforded the greatest gratification
to the constable, his retainers, and those who happened to gather to see
what was going on. This ended, and the bill paid, the Easton delegation
got into their wagons and turned their horses heads towards home.

We passed three delightful days under the Old Offender's roof, and
then thanking our host for his kindness to us, and paying our bill, we
started on our return journey for Oxford. We arrived safely, and staid
with Boston Yankee a fortnight. We were close by the Scheimer homestead,
which was but a few miles away across the river; but we feared neither
father nor brothers, nor even the woman who was so unwilling to let
Sarah go with me. The constable, and the rest had carried home the news
of our marriage, and the old folks made the best of it. Indeed, after
they heard we had returned to Oxford, Sarah's mother sent a man over to
tell her that if she would come home any day she could pack her clothes
and other things, and take them away with her. The day after we received
this invitation, Boston Yankee offered to take Sarah over home, and
promised to bring her safely back. So she went, was treated tolerably
well, at any rate, she secured her clothes and brought them home with
her.

It was now time to bid farewell to our staunch friend, Boston Yankee. I
had inducements to go to Goshen, Orange County, N. Y., where I had many
acquaintances, and to Goshen we went. We found a good boarding place,
and I began to practice medicine, After we had been there a while, Sarah
wrote home to let her family know where she was, and that she was well
and happy. Her father wrote in reply that we both might come there at
any time, and that if she would come home he would do as well by her as
he would by any of his children. This letter made Sarah uneasy. In spite
of all the ill usage she had received from her parents and family, she
was nevertheless homesick, and longed to get back again. I could see
that this feeling grew upon her daily. We were pleasantly situated
where we were; I had a good and growing practice, and we had made many
friends; but this did not satisfy her; she had some property in her own
right, but her father was trustee of it, and he had hitherto kept it
away from her from spite at her love affair with me. But now she was to
be taken into favor again, and she represented to me that we could go
back and get her money, and that I could establish myself there as well
as anywhere; we could live well and happily among her friends and old
associations. These things were dinged in my ears day after day, till I
was sick of the very sound. I could see that she was bound, or, as the
Dutch doctor would have said, "bewitched" to go back, and at last, after
five happy months in Goshen, in an evil hour I consented to go home with
her.



CHAPTER V. HOW THE SCHEIMERS MADE ME SUFFER.

RETURN TO SCHEIMER--PEACE AND THEN PANDEMONIUM--FRIGHTFUL FAMILY
ROW--RUNNING FOR REFUGE--THE GANG AGAIN--ARREST AT MIDNIGHT--STRUGGLE
WITH MY CAPTORS--IN JAIL ONCE MORE--PUT IN IRONS--A HORRIBLE PRISON
BREAKING OUT--THE DUNGEON--SARAH'S BABY--CURIOUS COMPROMISES--OLD
SCHEIMER MY JAILER--SIGNING A BOND--FREE AGAIN--LAST WORDS FROM SARAH.



We went back to the Scheimer homestead and were favorably received.
There was no special enthusiasm over our return, no marked
demonstrations of delight; but they seemed glad to see us, and all the
unpleasant things of the past, if not forgotten, were tacitly ignored
on all sides. We passed a pleasant evening together in what seemed a
re-united family circle--one of the brothers only was absent--and next
morning we met cordially around the breakfast table. I really began to
think it was possible that all the old difficulties might be healed, and
that the pleasant picture Sarah painted, at Goshen, about settling down
happily in Pennsylvania, could be fully realized.

After breakfast I took a conveyance to go three or four miles to see a
man who owed me some money for medical services in his family, and was
away from Scheimer's three or four hours. During this brief absence I
could not help thinking with genuine satisfaction of the happiness Sarah
was experiencing in the gratification of her longing to return home
again. Surely, I thought, she must be happy now. No more homesickness,
and a full and complete reconciliation with her family; all the anger,
abuse, and blows forgotten or forgiven; she restored to her place in the
family; and even her objectionable husband received with open arms.

But what an enormous difference there is between fancy and fact. During
this brief absence of mine, had come home the brother who had always
seemed to concentrate the hatred of the whole family towards me for the
wrong they assumed I had done to the youngest daughter who loved me.
On my return I found the peaceful home I left in the morning a perfect
pandemonium. Sarah was fairly frantic. The whole family were abusing
her. The returned brother especially, was calling her all the vile names
he could lay his tongue to. I learned afterwards that he had been doing
it ever since he came into the house that day and found her at home and
heard that I was with her. They had picked, wrenched rather, out of her
the secret I had confided to her that I had another wife from whom I was
"separated," but not divorced. My sudden presence on this scene was not
exactly oil on troubled waters; it was gunpowder to fire. As soon as
Sarah saw me at the door she cried out:

"O! husband, let us go away from here."

Her mother turned and shouted at me that I had better fly at once or
they would kill me. Meanwhile, that mob, which the Scheimer boys seemed
always to have at hand, was gathering in the dooryard. I managed to get
near enough to Sarah to tell her that I would send a man for her next
day, and then if she was willing to come with me she must get away
from her family if possible. I then made a rush through the crowd, and
reached the road. I think the gang had an indistinct knowledge of the
situation, or they would have mobbed me, and perhaps killed me. They
knew something was "to pay" at Scheimer's, but did not know exactly
what. Once on the road it was my intention to have gone over to
Belvidere, and then on to Oxford, where I should have found a sure
refuge with my friend Boston Yankee.

Would that I had done so; but I was a fool; I thought I could be of
service to Sarah by remaining near her; might see her next day; I might
even be able to get her out of the house, and then we could once more
elope together and go back again to Goshen where we had been so happy.
So I went to a public house three miles above Scheimer's, and remained
there quietly during the rest of the day, revolving plans for the
deliverance of Sarah. I thought only of her. It is strange that I did
not once realize what a perilous position I was in myself--that, firmly
as I believed myself to be wedded to Sarah, I was in fact amenable to
the law, and liable to arrest and punishment. All this never occurred to
me. I saw one or two of the gang who were at Scheimer's about the hotel,
but they did not offer to molest me, and I paid no particular attention
to them. I did not know then that they were spies and were watching my
movements. At nine o'clock I went to bed. At midnight, or thereabouts,
I was roughly awakened and told to get up. Without waiting for me,
to comply, five men who had entered my room pulled me out of bed, and
almost before I could huddle on my clothes I was handcuffed. Then one of
them, who said he was a constable from Easton, showed a warrant for my
arrest. What the arrest was for I was not informed. I was taken down
stairs, put into a wagon, the men followed, and the horses started in
the direction of Easton. By Scheimer's on the way, and I could see a
light in Sarah's window. I remembered how in, all the Bedlam in
the house that morning she still cried out: "I will go with him." I
remembered how, only a few months before, she had been brutally flogged
in that very chamber, to "get the devil out of her." I remembered, too,
the many happy, happy hours we had passed together. And here was I,
handcuffed and dragged in a wagon, I knew not whither.

This for thoughts--in the way of action, was all the while trying to
get my handcuffs off, and at last I succeeded in getting one hand free.
Waiting my opportunity till we came to a piece of woods, I suddenly
jumped up and sprang from the wagon. It was a very dark night, and in
running into the woods I struck against a tree with such force as
to knock me down and nearly stun me. Two of the men were on me in an
instant. After a brief struggle I managed to get away and ran again. I
should have escaped, only a high rail fence brought me to a sudden stop,
and I was too exhausted to climb over it. My pursuers who were hard at
my heels the whole while now laid hold of me. In the subsequent struggle
I got out my pocket knife, and stabbed one of them, cutting his arm
badly. Then they overpowered me. They dragged me to the roadside,
brought a rope out of the wagon, bound my arms and legs, and so at last
carried me to Easton.

It was nearly daylight when I was thrust into jail. There were no cells,
only large rooms for a dozen or more men, and I was put, into one of
these with several prisoners who were awaiting trial, or who had been
tried and were there till they could be sent to prison. It was a day
or two before I found out what I was there for. Then a Dutch Deputy
Sheriff, who was also keeper of the jail, came and told me that I was
held for bigamy, adding the consoling intelligence that it would be a
very hard job for me, and that I would get five or six years in State
prison sure. I was well acquainted in Easton, and I sent for lawyer
Litgreave for assistance and advice. I sent also to my half-sister in
Delaware County, N. Y., and in a day or two she came and saw me, and
gave Mr. Litgreave one hundred dollars retaining fee. My lawyer went to
see the Scheimers and when he returned he told me that he hoped to save
me from State prison--at all events he would exercise the influence he
had over the family to that end; but I must expect to remain in jail a
long time. Precisely what this meant I did not know then; but I found
out afterwards.

Soon after this visit from the lawyer, the Deputy Sheriff came in and
said that he was ordered "by the Judge" to iron me, and it was done.
They were heavy leg-irons weighing full twelve pounds, and I may say
here that I wore them during the whole term of my imprisonment in this
jail, or rather they wore me--wearing their way in time almost into
the bone. I had been here a week now, and was well acquainted with the
character of the place. It was indescribably filthy; no pretence was
made of cleansing it. The prisoners were half fed, and, at that, the
food was oftentimes so vile that starving men rejected it. The deputy
who kept the jail was cruel and malignant, and took delight in torturing
his prisoners. He would come in sometimes under pretence of looking at
my irons to see if they were safe, and would twist and turn them about
so that I suffered intolerable pain, and blood flowed from my wounds
made by these cruel irons. Such abuse as he could give with his tongue
he dispensed freely. Of course he was a coward, and he never dared to
come into one of the prisoner's rooms unless he was armed. This is a
faithful photograph of the interior of the jail at Easton, Penn., as
it was a few years ago; there may have been some improvement since that
time; for the sake of humanity, I hope there has been.

After I had been in this jail about six weeks, and had become well
acquainted with my room-mates, I communicated to them one day, the
result of my observation:

"There," said I, showing them a certain place in the wall, "is a loose
stone that with a little labor can be lifted out, and it will leave a
hole large enough for us to get out of and go where we like."

Examination elicited a unanimous verdict in favor of making the attempt.
With no tools but a case knife we dug out the mortar on all sides of the
stone doing the work by turns and covering the stone by hanging up an
old blanket--which excited no suspicion, as it was at the head of one of
the iron bedsteads--whenever the Deputy or any of his men were likely to
visit us. In twelve days we completed the work, and could lift out the
stone. The hole was large enough to let a man through, and there was
nothing for us to do but to crawl out one after the other and drop down
a few feet into the yard. This yard was surrounded by a board fence that
could be easily surmounted. I intended to take the lead, after taking
off my irons (which I had learned to do, and indeed, did every day,
putting them on only when I was liable to be "inspected") and after
leaving these irons at the Deputy's door, I intended to put myself on
the Jersey side of the river as speedily as possible.

Liberty was within reach of every man in that room, and the night was
set for the escape. But one of the crowd turned traitor, and, under
pretence, of speaking to the Deputy about some matter, managed to be
called out of the room and disclosed the whole. The man was waiting
transportation to prison to serve out a sentence of ten years, and,
with the chance of escape before him, it seemed singular that he should
reveal a plan which promised to give him liberty; but probably he
feared a failure; or that he might be recaptured and his prison sentence
increased; while on the other hand by disclosing the plot he could
curry favor enough to get his term reduced, and perhaps he might gain a
pardon. Any how, he betrayed us. The Deputy came in and found the stone
in the condition described, and forthwith we were all removed to the
dungeon, or dark room, and kept there on bread and water for twelve
days. We heard afterwards that our betrayer did get five years less than
his original sentence for subjecting his comrades in misery to twelve
days of almost indescribable suffering. We were not only in a totally
dark and frightfully filthy hole, but we were half starved, and the
Deputy daily took delight in taunting us with our sufferings.

At the end of the twelve days we were taken back to the old room where
we found the stone securely fastened in with irons. Moreover, we were
now under stricter observation, and at stated hours every day, an
inspector came in and examined the walls. This soon wore off, however,
and when the inspection was finally abandoned, about two months from the
time of our first attempt, we managed to find another place in the old
wall where we could dig out and we went to work. We were a fortnight at
it, and had nearly completed our labor when we were discovered.

This time we spent fourteen days in the dungeon for our pains.

And now comes an extraordinary disclosure with regard to my
imprisonment. A few days after my removal from the dungeon to the old
quarters again, the Deputy, in one of his rare periods of what, with
him, passed for good humor, informed me that Sarah had been confined,
and had given birth to a fine boy; that she was crying for my release;
that Lawyer Sitgreave was interceding for me; but that the old man
Scheimer was still obstinate and would not let me out. Passing over
my feelings with regard to the birth of my son, here was a revelation
indeed! It will be remembered that I had only been told that I was under
indictment for bigamy. I had never been brought before a justice for
a preliminary examination; never bound over for trial; and now it
transpired that old Scheimer, a Pennsylvania Dutch farmer, had the
power to put me in jail, put me in irons, and subject me to long months,
perhaps years of imprisonment. I had something to occupy my thoughts
now, and for the remaining period of my jail life.

Next came a new dodge of the Scheimers, the object of which was to show
that Sarah's marriage to me was no marriage at all, thus leaving her
free to marry any other man her family might force upon her. When I had
been in jail seven months, one day the Deputy came in and said that he
was going to take off my irons. I told him I wouldn't trouble him to
do that, for though I had worn them when he and his subordinates were
around till the irons had nearly killed me, yet at other times I had
been in a habit of taking them off at pleasure; and to prove it, I sat
down and in a few minutes handed him the irons. The man was amazed; but
saying nothing about the irons, he approached me on another subject. He
said he thought if I would sign an acknowledgment that I was a married
man when I married Sarah Scheimer, and would leave the State forever, I
could get out of jail; would I do it? I told him I would give no answer
till I had seen my counsel.

Well, the next day Lawyer Sitgreave came to me and told me I had better
do it, and I consented. Shortly afterwards, I was taken to court, for
the first time in this whole affair, and was informed by the judge that
if I would sign a bond not to go near the Scheimer house or family he
would discharge me. I signed such a bond, and the judge then told me I
was discharged; but that I ought to have gone to State prison for ten
years for destroying the peace and happiness of the Scheimer family.
Truly the Scheimer family were a power, indeed, in that part of the
country!

My lawyer gave me five dollars and I went to Harmony and staid that
night. The next day I went to an old friend of mine, a Methodist
minister, and persuaded him to go over and see what Sarah Scheimer's
feelings were towards me, and if she was willing to come to me with our
child. He went over there, but the old Scheimers suspected his errand,
and watched him closely to see that he held no communication with Sarah.
He did, however, have an opportunity to speak to her, and she sent me
word that if she could ever get her money and get away from her parents,
she would certainly join me in any part of the world. I was warned, at
the same time, not to come near the house, for fear that her father or
some of her brothers would kill me.



CHAPTER VI. FREE LIFE AND FISHING.

TAKING CARE OF CRAZY MEN--CARRYING OFF A BOY--ARRESTED FOR STEALING MY
OWN HORSE AND BUGGY--FISHING IN LAKE WINNIPISEOGEE--AN ODD LANDLORD--A
WOMAN AS BIG AS A HOGSHEAD--REDUCING THE HOGSHEAD TO A BARREL--WONDERFUL
VERIFICATION OF A DREAM--SUCCESSFUL MEDICAL PRACTICE--A BUSY WINTER
IN NEW HAMPSHIRE--BLANDISHMENTS OF CAPTAIN BROWN--I GO TO NEWARK, NEW
JERSEY.



The next day I left Harmony and walked to Port Jarvis, on the Erie
Railroad, N. Y., arriving late at night, and entirely footsore, sick,
and disheartened. I went to the hotel, and the next morning I found
myself seriously sick. Asking advice, I was directed to the house of
a widow, who promised to nurse and take care of me. I was ill for two
weeks, and meantime, my half-sister in Delaware County, to whom I
made known my condition, sent me money for my expenses, and when I
had sufficiently recovered to travel, I went to this sister's house in
Sidney, and there I remained several days, till I was quite well and
strong again.

Casting about for something to do, a friend told me that he knew of
an opportunity for a good man at Newbury to take care of a young man,
eighteen years of age, who was insane. I went there and saw his father,
and he put him under my charge. I had the care of him four months, and
during the last two months of the time I traveled about with him,
and returned him, finally, to his friends in a materially improved
condition. The friends of another insane man in Montgomery, near
Newbury, hearing of my success with this young man, sent for me to come
and see them. I went there and found a man who had been insane seven
years, but who was quiet and well-behaved, only he was "out of his
head." I engaged to do what I could for him. The father of my Newbury
patient had paid me well, and with my medical practice and the sale of
medicines in traveling about, I had accumulated several hundred dollars,
and when I went to Montgomery I had a good horse and buggy which cost me
five hundred dollars. So, when my new patient had been under my care and
control two months, I proposed that he should travel about with me in my
buggy, and visit various parts of the State in the immediate vicinity.
His friends thought well of the suggestion, and we traveled in this way
about four months, stopping a few days here and there, when I practiced
where I could, and sold medicines, making some money. At the end of
this time I went back to Montgomery with my patient, as I think, fully
restored, and his father, besides, paying the actual expenses of our
journey, gave me six hundred dollars.

Returning to Sidney I learned that my first and worst wife was then
living with the children at Unadilla, a few miles across the river in
Otsego County. I had no desire to see her, but I heard at the same time
that my youngest boy, a lad ten years old, had been sent to work on a
farm three miles beyond, and that he was not well taken care of. I drove
over to see about it, and after some inquiry I was told that the boy
was then in school. Going to the schoolhouse and asking for him, the
school-mistress, who knew me, denied that he was there, but I pushed
in, and found him, and a ragged, miserable looking little wretch he was.
I brought him out, put him into the carriage and took him with me on the
journey which I was then contemplating to Amsterdam, N. Y., stopping
at the first town to get him decently clothed. The boy went with me
willingly, indeed he was glad to go, and in due time we arrived at
Amsterdam, and from there we went to Troy.

I had not been in Troy two hours before I was arrested for stealing my
own horse and buggy! My turnout was taken from me, and I found myself in
durance vile. I was not long in procuring bail, and I then set myself,
to work to find out what this meant. I was shown a handbill describing
my person, giving my name, giving a description of my horse, and
offering a reward of fifty dollars for my arrest. This was signed by
a certain Benson, of Kingston, Sullivan County, N.Y. I then remembered
that while I was traveling with my insane patient from Montgomery
through Sullivan County, I fell in with a Benson who was a very
plausible fellow, and who scraped acquaintance with me, and while I was
at Kingston he rode about with me on one or two occasions. One day he
told me that he knew a girl just out of the place who was subject to
fits, and wanted to know if I could do anything for her; that her father
was rich and would pay a good price to have her cured. I went to see the
girl and did at least enough to earn a fee of one hundred dollars,
which her father gladly paid me. Benson also introduced me to some other
people whom I found profitable patients. I thought he was a very good
friend to me, but he was a cool, calculating rascal. He meant to rob me
of my horse and buggy, and went deliberately to work about it. First, he
issued the handbill which caused my arrest in Troy, where he knew I was
going. Next, as appeared when he came up to Troy to prosecute the suit
against me, he forged a bill of sale. The case was tried and decided
in my favor. Benson appealed, and again it was decided that the horse
belonged to me. I then had him indicted for perjury and forgery, and he
was put under bonds of fourteen hundred dollars in each case to appear
for trial. Some how or other he never appeared, and whether he forfeited
his bonds, or otherwise slipped through the "meshes of the law," I never
learned, nor have I ever seen him since he attempted to swindle me.
But these proceedings kept me in Troy more than a month, and to pay
my lawyer and other expenses, I actually sold the horse and buggy the
scoundrel tried to steal from me.

Taking my boy to Sidney and putting him under the care of my half
sister, I went to Boston, where I met two friends of mine who were
about going to Meredith Bridge, N.H., to fish through the ice on Lake
Winnipiseogee. It was early in January, 1853, and good, clear, cold
weather. They represented the sport to be capital, and said that plenty
of superb lake trout and pickerel could be taken every day, and urged me
to go with them. As I had nothing special to do for a few days, I went.
When we reached Meredith we stopped at a tavern near the lake, kept by
one of the oddest landlords I have ever met. After a good supper, as
we were sitting in the barroom, the landlord came up to me and at once
opened conversation in the following manner:

"Waal, where do you come from, anyhow?"

"From Boston," I replied.

"Waal, what be you, anyhow?"

"Well, I practice medicine, and take care of the sick."

"Dew ye? Waal, do ye ever cure anybody?"

"O, sometimes; quite frequently, in fact."

"Dew ye! waal, there's a woman up here to Lake Village, 'Squire
Blaisdell's wife, who has had the dropsy more'n twelve years; been
filling' all the time till they tell me she's bigger'n a hogshead now,
and she's had a hundred doctors, and the more doctors she has the bigger
she gets; what d' ye think of that now?"

I answered that I thought it was quite likely, and then turned away
from the landlord to talk to my friends about our proposed sport for
to-morrow, mentally making note of 'Squire Blaisdell's wife in Lake
Village.

After breakfast next morning we went out on the lake, cut holes in the
ice, set our lines, and before dinner we had taken several fine trout
and pickerel, the largest and finest of which we put into a box with
ice, and sent as a present to President Pierce, in Washington. We had
agreed, the night before, to fish for him the first day, and to send
him the best specimens we could from his native state. After dinner my
friends started to go out on the ice again, and I told them "I guess'd I
wouldn't go with them, I had fished enough for that day." They insisted
I should go, but I told them I preferred to take a walk and explore the
country. So they went to the lake and I walked up to Lake Village.

I soon found Mr. Blaisdell's house, and as the servant who came to the
door informed me that Mr. Blaisdell was not at home, I asked to see
Mrs. Blaisdell, And was shown in to that lady. She was not quite the
"hogshead" the landlord declared her to be, but she was one of the worst
cases of dropsy I had ever seen. I introduced myself to her, told her my
profession, and that I had called upon her in the hope of being able to
afford her some relief; that I wanted nothing for my services unless I
could really benefit her.

"O, Doctor," said she, "you can do nothing for me; in the past twelve
years I have had at least forty different doctors, and none of them have
helped me."

"But there can be no harm in trying the forty-first;" and as I said
it I took from my vest pocket and held out in the palm of my hand some
pills:

"Here, madame, are some pills made from a simple blossom, which cannot
possibly harm you, and which, I am sure, will do you a great deal of
good."

"O, Mary!" she exclaimed to her niece, who was in attendance upon her,
"this is my dream! I dreamed last night that my father appeared to me
and told me that a stranger would come with a blossom in his hand; that
he would offer it to me, and that if I would take it I should recover.
Go and get a glass of water and I will take these pills at once."

"Surely," said Mary, "you are not going to take this stranger's medicine
without knowing anything about it, or him?"

"I am indeed; go and get the water."

She took the medicine and then told me that her father, who had died two
years ago, was a physician, and had carefully attended to her case as
long as he lived; but that she had a will of her own, and had sent far
and near for other doctors, though with no good result.

"You have come to me," she continued, "and although I am not
superstitious, your coming with a blossom in your hand, figuratively
speaking, is so exactly in accordance with my dream, that I am going to
put myself under your care."

She then asked me if I lived in the neighborhood, and I told her no;
that I had merely come up from Boston with two friends to try a few
days' fishing through the ice on the lake.

"You can fish to better purpose here, I think," she said; "you can get
plenty of practice in the villages and farm houses about here: at any
rate, stay for the present and undertake my case, and I will pay you
liberally."

I went back to Meredith Bridge--I believe it is now called Laconia--and
had another day's fishing with my friends. When they were ready to pack
up and return to Boston, I astonished them by informing them that I
should stay where I was for the present, perhaps for months, and that I
believed I could find a good practice in Meredith and adjoining places.
So they left me and I went to Lake Village, and made that pleasant place
my headquarters.

The weeks wore on, and if Mrs. Blaisdell was a hogshead, as the Meredith
landlord said, when I first saw her, she soon became a barrel under my
treatment, and in four months she was entirely cured, and was as sound
as any woman in the State. I had as much other business too as I could
attend to, and was very busy and happy all the time.

In May I went to Exeter, alternating between there and Portsmouth, and
finding enough to do till the end of July. While I was in Portsmouth
on one of my last visits to that place, I received a call from a
sea-captain by the name of Brown, who told me that he had heard of my
success in dropsical cases, and that I must go to Newark, N. J., and
see his daughter. "Pay," he said, "was no object; I must go." I told him
that I had early finished my business in that vicinity, and that when I
went to New York, as I proposed to do shortly, I would go over to
Newark and see his daughter. A few days afterward, when I had settled my
business and collected my bills in Portsmouth and Exeter, I went to New
York, and from there to Newark.



CHAPTER VII. WEDDING A WIDOW, AND THE CONSEQUENCES.

I MARRY A WIDOW--SIX WEEKS OF HAPPINESS--CONFIDING A SECRET AND THE
CONSEQUENCES--THE WIDOW'S BROTHER--SUDDEN FLIGHT FROM NEWARK--IN
HARTFORD, CONN.--MY WIFE'S SISTER BETRAYS ME--TRIAL FOR
BIGAMY--SENTENCED TO TEN YEARS IMPRISONMENT--I BECOME A "BOBBIN BOY"--A
GOOD FRIEND--GOVERNOR PRICE VISITS ME IN PRISON--HE PARDONS ME--TEN
YEARS' SENTENCE FULFILLED IN SEVEN MONTHS.



Why in the world did Captain Brown ever tempt me with the prospect of
a profitable patient in Newark? I had no thought of going to that city,
and no business there except to see if I could cure Captain Brown's
daughter. With my matrimonial monomania it was like putting my hand into
the fire to go to a fresh place, where I should see fresh faces, and
where fresh temptations would beset me. And when I went to Newark, I
went only as I supposed, to see a single patient; but Captain Brown
prevailed upon me to stay to take care of his daughter, and assured me
that he and his friends would secure me a good practice. They did. In
two months I was doing as well in my profession as I had ever done in
any place where I had located. I might have attended strictly to my
business, and in a few years have acquired a handsome competence. But,
as ill luck, which, strangely enough, I then considered good luck, would
have it, when I had been in Newark some two months, I became acquainted
with a buxom, good-looking widow, Mrs. Elizabeth Roberts. I protest
to-day that she courted me--not I her. She was fair, fascinating, and
had a goodly share of property. I fell into the snare. She said she was
lonely; she sighed; she smiled, and I was lost.

Would that I had observed the elder Weller's injunction: "Bevare of
vidders;" would that I had never seen the Widow Roberts, or rather that
she had never seen me. Eight weeks after we first met we were married.
We had a great wedding in her own house, and all her friends were
present. I was in good practice with as many patients as I could attend
to; she had a good home and we settled down to be very happy.

For six weeks, only six weeks, I think we were so. We might have been
so for six weeks, six months, six years longer; but alas! I was a fool I
confided to her the secret of my first marriage, and separation, and she
confided the same secret to her brother, a well-to-do wagon-maker in
Newark. So far as Elizabeth was concerned, she said she didn't care;
so long as the separation was mutual and final, since so many years
had elapsed, and especially since I hadn't seen the woman for full six
years, and was not supposed to know whether she was alive or dead, why,
it was as good as a divorce; so reasoned Elizabeth, and it was precisely
my own reasoning, and the reasoning which had got me into numberless
difficulties, to say nothing of jails and prisons. But the brother had
his doubts about it, and came and talked to me on the subject several
times. We quarrelled about it. He threatened to have me arrested for
bigamy. I told him that if he took a step in that direction I would flog
him. Then he had me brought before a justice for threatening him, with a
view to having me put under bonds to keep the peace. I employed a lawyer
who managed my case so well that the justice concluded there was no
cause of action against me.

But this lawyer informed me that the brother was putting, even then,
another rod in pickle for me, and that I had better clear out. I took
his advice, I went to the widow's house, packed my trunk, gathered
together what money I could readily lay hands upon, and with about $300
in my pocket, I started for New York, staying that night at a hotel in
Courtland street.

The following morning I went over to Jersey City, hired a saddle-horse,
and rode to Newark. The precise object of my journey I do not think I
knew myself; but I must have had some vague idea of persuading Elizabeth
to leave Newark and join me in New York or elsewhere. I confess, too,
that I was more or less under the influence of liquor, and considerably
more than less. However, no one would have noticed this in my appearance
or demeanor. I rode directly to Elizabeth's door, hitched my horse, and
went into the house. The moment my wife saw me she cried out:

"For God's sake get out of this house and out of town as soon as you
can; they have been watching for you ever since yesterday; they've got a
warrant for your arrest; don't stay here one moment."

I asked her if she was willing to follow me, and she said she would
do so if she only dared but her brother had made an awful row, and had
sworn he would put me in prison anyhow; I had better go back to New York
and await events. I started for the door, and was unhitching my horse,
when the brother and a half dozen more were upon me. I sprang to the
saddle. They tried to stop me; the over-eager brother even caught me
by the foot; but I dashed through the crowd and rode like mad to Jersey
City, returned the horse to the livery stable, crossed the ferry to New
York, went to my hotel, got my trunk, and started for Hartford, Conn.,
where I arrived in the evening.

This was in the month of June, 1854. I went to the old Exchange Hotel in
State street, and very soon acquired a good practice. Indeed, it seems
as if I was always successful enough in my medical business--my mishaps
have been in the matrimonial line. When I had been in Hartford about
three months, and was well settled, I thought I would go down to New
York and see a married sister of Elizabeth's, who was living there, and
try to find out how matters were going on over in Newark. That I found
out fully, if not exactly to my satisfaction, will appear anon.

When I called at the sister's house, the servant told me she was out,
but would be back in an hour; so I left my name, promising to call
again. I returned again at one o'clock in the afternoon, and the sister
was in, but declined to see me. As I was coming down the steps, a
policeman who seemed to be lounging on the opposite side of the street,
beckoned to me, and suspecting nothing, I crossed over to see what he
wanted. He simply wanted to know my name, and when I gave it to him he
informed me that I was his prisoner. I asked for what? and he said "as a
fugitive from justice in New Jersey."

This was for taking the pains to come down from Hartford to inquire
after the welfare of my wife! whose sister, the moment the servant told
her I had been there, and would call again, had gone to the nearest
police station and given information, or made statements, which led to
the setting of this latest trap for me. The policeman took me before a
justice who sent me to the Tombs. On my arrival there I managed to pick
up a lawyer, or rather one of the sharks of the place picked me up, and
said that for twenty-five dollars he would get me clear in three or
four hours. I gave him the money, and from that day till now, I have
never set eyes upon him. I lay in a cell all night, and next morning
Elizabeth's brother, to whom the sister in New York had sent word that
I was caged, came over from Newark to see me. He said he felt sorry for
me, but that he was "bound to put me through." He then asked me if I
would go over to Newark without a requisition from the Governor of
New Jersey, and I told him I would not; whereupon he went away without
saying another word, and I waited all day to hear from the lawyer to
whom I had given twenty-five dollars, but he did not come.

So next day when the brother came over and asked me the same question,
I said I would go; wherein I was a fool; for I ought to have reflected
that he had had twenty-four hours in which to get a requisition, and
that he might in fact have made application for one already, without
getting it, and every delay favored my chances of getting out. But I had
no one to advise me, and so I went quietly with him and an officer to
the ferry, where we crossed and went by cars to Newark. I was at once
taken before a justice, who, after a hearing of the case, bound me over,
under bonds of only one thousand dollars, to take my trial for bigamy.

If I could have gone into the street I could have procured this
comparatively trifling bail in half an hour; as it was, after I was in
jail I sent for a man whom I knew, and gave him my gold watch and one
hundred dollars, all the money I had, to procure me bail, which he
promised to do; but he never did a thing for me, except to rob me.

A lawyer came to me and offered to take my case in hand for one hundred
dollars, but I had not the money to give him. I then sent to New York
for a lawyer whom I knew, and when he came to see me he took the same
view of the case that Elizabeth and I did; that is, that the long
separation between my first wife and myself, and my presumed ignorance
as to whether she was alive or dead, gave me full liberty to marry
again. At least, he thought any court would consider it an extenuating
circumstance, and he promised to be present at my trial and aid me all
he could.

I lay in Newark jail nine months, awaiting my trial. During that time I
had almost daily quarrels with the jailor, who abused me shamefully, and
told me I ought to go to State prison and stay there for life. Once he
took hold of me and I struck him, for which I was put in the dark cell
forty-eight hours. At last came my trial. The court appointed counsel
for me, for I had no money to fee a lawyer, and my New York friend was
on hand to advise and assist. I lad witnesses to show the length of time
that had elapsed since my separation from my first wife, and we also
raised the point as to whether the justice who married me, was really
a legal justice of the peace or not. The trial occupied two days. I
suppose all prisoners think so, but the Judge charged against me in
every point; the jury was out two hours, and then came in for advice on
a doubtful question; the judge gave them another blast against me, and
an hour after they came in with a verdict of "guilty." I went back to
jail and two days afterwards was brought up for sentence which was--"ten
years at hard labor in the State prison at Trenton."

Good heavens! All this for being courted and won by a widow!

The day following, I was taken in irons to Trenton. The Warden of
the prison, who wanted to console me, said that, for the offence, my
sentence was an awful one, and that he didn't believe I would be obliged
to serve out half of it. As I felt then, I did not believe I should live
out one-third of it. After I had gone through the routine of questions,
and had been put in the prison uniform, a cap was drawn down over my
face, as if I was about to be hung, and I was led, thus blind-folded,
around and around, evidently to confuse me, with regard to the interior
of the prison--in case I might ever have any idea of breaking out. At
last I was brought to a cell door and the cap was taken off. There were,
properly no "cells" in this prison--at least I never saw any; but good
sized rooms for two prisoners, not only to live in but to work in. I
found myself in a room with a man who was weaving carpets, and I was at
once instructed in the art of winding yarn on bobbins for him--in fact,
I was to be his "bobbin-boy."

I pursued this monotonous occupation for two months, when I told the
keeper I did not like that business, and wanted to try something that
had a little more variety in it. Whereupon he put me at the cane chair
bottoming business, which gave me another room and another chum, and I
remained at this work while I was in the prison. In three weeks I could
bottom one chair, while my mate was bottoming nine or ten as his day's
work; but I told the keeper I did not mean to work hard, or work at all,
if I could help it. He was a very nice fellow and he only laughed and
let me do as I pleased. Indeed, I could not complain of my treatment
in any respect; I had a good clean room, good bed, and the fare was
wholesome and abundant. But then, there was that terrible, terrible
sentence of ten long years of this kind of life, if I should live
through it.

After I had been in prison nearly seven months, one day a merchant
tailor whom I well knew in Newark, and who made my clothes, including
my wedding suit when I married the Widow Roberts, came to see me. The
legislature was in session and he was a member of the Senate. He knew
all the circumstances of my case, and was present at my trial. After the
first salutation, he laughingly said:

"Well, Doctor, those are not quite as nice clothes as I used to furnish
you with."

"No," I replied, "but perhaps they are more durable."

After some other chaff and chat, he made me tell him all about my first
marriage and subsequent separation, and after talking awhile he went
away, promising to see me soon. I looked upon this only as a friendly
visit, for which I was grateful; and attached no great importance to it.
But he came again in a few days, and after some general conversation, he
told me that there was a movement on foot in my favor, which might bring
the best of news to me; that he had not only talked with his friends in
the legislature, and enlisted their sympathy and assistance, but he had
laid the whole circumstances, from beginning to end, before Governor
Price; that the Governor would visit the prison shortly, and then I must
do my best in pleading my own cause.

In a day or two the Governor came, and I had an opportunity to relate
my story. I told him all about my first unfortunate marriage, and the
separation. He said that he knew the facts, and also that he had lately
received a letter from my oldest son on the subject, and had read it
with great interest. I then appealed to the Governor for his clemency;
my sentence was an outrageously severe one, and seemed almost prompted
by private malice; I implored him to pardon me; I went down on my knees
before him, and asked his mercy. He told me to be encouraged; that he
would be in the prison again in a few days, and he would see me. He then
went away.

I at once drew up a petition which my friend in the Senate circulated
in the legislature for signatures, and afterwards sent it to Newark,
securing some of the best names in that city. It was then returned to
me, and two weeks afterwards when the Governor came again to the prison
I presented it to him, and he put it in his pocket.

In two days' time, Governor Price sent my pardon into the prison. The
Warden came and told me of it, and said he would let me out in an hour.
Then came a keeper who once more put the cap over my face and led me
around the interior--I was willingly led now--till he brought me to a
room where he gave me my own clothes which I put on, and with a kind
parting word, and five dollars from the Warden, I was soon in the
street, once more a free man. My sentence of ten years had been
fulfilled by an imprisonment of exactly seven months.

I went and called on Governor Price to thank him for his great goodness
towards me. He received me kindly, talked to me for some time, and gave
me some good advice and a little money. With this and the five dollars I
received from the Warden of the prison I started for New York.



CHAPTER VII. ON THE KEEN SCENT.

GOOD RESOLUTIONS--ENJOYING FREEDOM--GOING AFTER A CRAZY MAN--THE
OLD TEMPTER IN A NEW FORM--MARY GORDON--MY NEW "COUSIN"--ENGAGED
AGAIN--VISIT TO THE OLD FOLKS AT HOME--ANOTHER MARRIAGE--STARTING FOR
OHIO--CHANGE OF PLANS--DOMESTIC QUARRELS--UNPLEASANT STORIES ABOUT
MARY--BOUND OVER TO KEEP THE PEACE--ANOTHER ARREST FOR BIGAMY--A
SUDDEN FLIGHT--SECRETED THREE WEEKS IN A FARM HOUSE--RECAPTURED AT
CONCORD--ESCAPED ONCE MORE--TRAVELING ON THE UNDERGROUND RAILROAD--IN
CANADA.



It would seem as if, by this time, I had had enough of miscellaneous
marrying and the imprisonment that almost invariably followed. I had
told Governor Price, when I first implored him for pardon, that if he
would release me I would begin a new life, and endeavor to be in all
respects a better man. I honestly meant to make every effort to be so,
and on my stay to New York I made numberless vows for my own future
good behavior. I bound myself over, as it were, to keep the pace--my own
peace and quiet especially--and became my own surety. That I could not
have had a poorer bondsman, subsequent events proved to my sorrow. But I
started fairly, and meant to let liquor alone; to attend strictly to my
medical business, which I always managed to make profitable, and above
all, to have nothing to do with women in the love-making or matrimonial
way.

With those good resolutions I arrived in New York and went to my old
hotel in Courtland Street, where I was well known and was well received.
My trunk, which I had left there sixteen months before, was safe, and
I had a good suit of clothes on my back--the clothes I took off when
I went to prison in Trenton--and which were returned to me when I came
away. I went to a friend who loaned me some money, and I remained two or
three days in town to try my new-found freedom, going about the city,
visiting places of amusement, enjoying myself very much, and keeping, so
far, the good resolutions I had formed.

From New York I went to Troy, and at the hotel where I stopped I became
acquainted with a woman who told me that her husband was in the Insane
Asylum at Brattleboro, Vt. She was going to see him, and if he was fit
to be removed, she proposed to take him home, with her. I told her
of the success I had had in taking care of two men at Newbury and
Montgomery; and how I had traveled about the country with them, and with
the most beneficial results to my patients. She was much interested,
inquired into the particulars, and finally thought the plan would be a
favorable one for her husband. She asked me to go with her to see him,
and said that if he was in condition to travel he should go about with
me if he would; at any rate, if he came out of the Asylum she would put
him under my care. We went together to Brattleboro, and the very day we
arrived her husband was taken in an apoplectic fit from which he did not
recover. She carried home his corpse, and I lost my expected patient.

But I must have something to do for my daily support, and so I went to
work and very soon sold some medicines and recipes, and secured a few
patients. I also visited the adjoining villages, and in a few weeks
I had a very good practice. I might have lived here quietly and made
money. Nobody knew anything of my former history, my marriages or my
misfortunes, and I was doing well, with a daily increasing business.
And so I went on for nearly three months, gaining new acquaintances, and
extending my practice every day.

Then came the old tempter in a new form, and my matrimonial monomania,
which I hoped was cured forever, broke out afresh. One day, at the
public house where I lived, I saw a fine girl from New Hampshire, with
whom I became acquainted--so easily, so far as she was concerned--that I
ought to have been warned to have nothing to do with her; but, as usual,
in such cases, my common sense left me, and I was infatuated enough to
fancy that I was in love.

Mary Gordon was the daughter of a farmer living near Keene, N. H., and
was a handsome girl about twenty years of age. She was going, she told
me, to visit some friends in Bennington, and would be there about a
month, during which time, if I was in that vicinity, she hoped I would
come and see her. We parted very lovingly, and when she had been in
Bennington a few days she wrote to me, setting a time for me to visit
her; but in business in Brattleboro was too good to leave, and I so
wrote to her. Whereupon, in another week, she came back to Brattleboro
and proposed to finish the remainder of her visit there, thus blinding
her friends at home who would think she was all the while at Bennington.

Our brief acquaintance when she was at the house before, attracted no
particular attention, and when she came now I told the landlord that she
was my cousin, and he gave her a room and I paid her bills. The cousin
business was a full cover to our intimacy; she sat next to me at the
table, rode about with me to see my patients, and when I went to places
near by to sell medicine, and we were almost constantly together. Of
course, we were engaged to be married, and that very soon.

In a fortnight after her arrival I went home with her to her father's
farm near Keene, and she told her mother that we were "engaged." The old
folks thought they would like to know me a little better, but she said
we were old friends, she knew me thoroughly, and meant to marry me.
There was no further objection on the part of her parents, and in the
few days following she and her mother were busily engaged in preparing
her clothes and outfit.

I then announced my intention of returning to Brattleboro to settle up
my business in that place, and she declared she would go with me; I
was sure to be lonesome; she might help me about my bills, and so on.
Strange as it may seem, her parents made no objection to her going,
though I was to be absent a fortnight, and was not to be married till
I came back. So we went together, and I and my "cousin" put up at the
hotel we had lately left. For two weeks I was busy in making my final
visits to my patients acquaintances, she generally going with me every
day.

At the end of that time we went back to Keene, and in three weeks we
were married in her father's house, the old folks making a great wedding
for us, which was attended by all the neighbors and friends of the
family. We stayed at home two weeks, and meanwhile arranged our plans
for the future. We proposed to go out to Ohio, where she had some
relatives, and settle down. She had seven hundred dollars in bank in
Keene which she drew, and we started on our journey. We went to Troy,
where we stayed a few days, and during that time we both concluded that
we would not go West, but return to Keene and live in the town instead
of on the farm, so that I could open an office and practice there.

So we went back to her home again, but before I completed my plans for
settling down in Keene, Mary and I had several quarrels which were worse
than mere ordinary matrimonial squabbles. Two or three young men in
Keene, with whom I had become acquainted, twitted me with marrying Mary,
and told me enough about her to convince me that her former life had not
been altogether what it should have been. I had been too blinded by
her beauty when I first saw her in Brattleboro, to notice how extremely
easily she was won. Her parents, too, were wonderfully willing, if not
eager, to marry her to me. All these things came to me now, and we had
some very lively conversations on the subject, in which the old folks
joined, siding with their daughter of course. By and by the girl went
to Keene and made a complaint that she was afraid of her life, and I was
brought before a magistrate and put under bonds of four hundred dollars
to keep the peace. I gave a man fifty dollars to go bail for me, and
then, instead of going out to the farm with Mary, I went to the hotel in
Keene.

The well-known character of the girl, my marriage to her, the brief
honeymoon, the quarrels and the cause of the same, were all too tempting
material not to be served up in a paragraph, and as I expected and
feared, out came the whole story in the Keene paper.

This was copied in other journals, and presently came letters to the
family and to other persons in the place, giving some account of my
former adventures and marriages. Of this however I knew nothing, till
one day, while I was at the hotel, I was suddenly arrested for bigamy.
But I was used to this kind of arrest by this time, and I went before
the magistrate with my mind made up that I must suffer again for my
matrimonial monomania.

It was just after dinner when I was arrested, and the examination, which
was a long one, continued till evening. Every one in the magistrate's
office was tired out with it, I especially, and so I took a favorable
opportunity to leave the premises. I bolted for the door, ran down
stairs into the street, and was well out of town before the astonished
magistrate, stunned constable, and amazed spectators realized that I had
gone.

Whether they than set out in pursuit of me I never knew, I only know
they did not catch me. I ran till I came to the house of a farmer whom
I had been attending for some ailment, and hurriedly narrating the
situation, I offered him one hundred dollars if he would secrete me till
the hue and cry was over and I could safely get away. I think he would
have done it from good will, but the hundred dollar bill I offered him
made the matter sure. He put my money into his pocket, and he put me
into a dark closet, not more than five feet square, and locked me in.

I stayed in that man's house, never going out of doors, for more than
three weeks, and did my best to board out my hundred dollars. The day
after my flight the whole neighborhood was searched, that is, the woods,
roads, and adjacent villages. They never thought of looking in a house,
particularly in a house so near the town; and, as I heard from my
protector, they telegraphed and advertised far and near for me.

I anticipated all this, and for this very reason I remained quietly
where I was, in an unsuspected house, and with my dark closet to retire
to whenever any one came in; and gossiping neighbors coming in almost
every hour, kept me in that hole nearly half the time. I heard my own
story told in that house at least fifty times, and in fifty different
ways.

At last, when I thought it was safe, one night my host harnessed up his
horses and carried me some miles on my way to Concord. He drove as far
as he dared, for he wanted to get back home by daylight, so that his
expedition might excite no suspicion. Twenty miles away from Keene he
set me down in the road, and, bidding him "good-bye," I began my march
toward Concord. When I arrived there, almost the first man I saw in the
street was a doctor from Keene. I did not think he saw me, but he did,
as I soon found out, for while I was waiting at the depot to take the
cars to the north, I was arrested.

The Keene doctor owed me a grudge for interfering, as he deemed it; with
his regular practice, and the moment he saw me he put an officer on my
trail. I thought it was safe here to take the cars, for I was footsore
and weary, nor did I get away from Keene as fast and as far as I wanted
to. I should have succeeded but for that doctor.

When the officer brought me before a justice, the doctor was a willing
witness to declare that I was a fugitive from justice, and he stated the
circumstances of my escape. So I was sent back to Keene under charge of
the very officer who arrested me at the depot.

I would not give this officer's name if I could remember it, but he was
a fine fellow, and was exceedingly impressible. For instance, on our
arrival at Keene, he allowed me to go to the hotel and pack my trunk to
be forwarded to Meredith Bridge by express. He then handed me over to
the authorities, and I was immediately taken before the magistrate from
whom I had previously escaped, the Concord officer accompanying the
Keene officer who had charge of me.

The examination was short; I was bound over in the sum of one thousand
dollars to take my trial for bigamy. On my way to jail I persuaded the
Concord officer--with a hundred dollar bill which I slipped into his
hand--to induce the other officer to go with me to the hotel under
pretense of looking after my things, and getting what would be necessary
for my comfort in jail. My Concord friend kept the other officer down
stairs--in the bar-room, I presume--while I went to my room. I put a
single shirt in my pocket; the distance from my window to the ground
was not more than twelve or fifteen feet, and I let myself down from the
window sill and then dropped.

I was out of the yard, into the street, and out of town in less than no
time. It was already evening, and everything favored my escape. I had
no idea of spending months in jail at Keene, and months more, perhaps
years, in the New Hampshire State Prison. All my past bitter experiences
of wretched prison life urged me to flight.

And fly I did. No stopping at the friendly farmer's, my former refuge,
this time; that would be too great a risk. No showing of myself in any
town or village where the telegraph might have conveyed a description
of my person. I traveled night and day on foot, and more at night than
during the day, taking by-roads, lying by in the woods, sleeping in
barns, and getting my meals in out-of-the-way farm houses.

I had plenty of money; but this kind of travelling is inexpensive, and,
paying twenty-five cents for one or two meals a day, as I dared to get
them, and sleeping in barns or under haystacks for nothing, my purse
did not materially diminish. I was a good walker, and in the course of
a week from the night when I left Keene, I found myself in Biddeford,
Maine.

There was some sense of security in being in another State, and here I
ventured to take the cars for Portland, where I staid two days, sending
in the meantime for my trunk from Meredith Bridge, and getting it by
express. Of course it went to a fictitious address at Meredith, and it
came to me under the same name which I had registered in my hotel at
Portland.

I did not mean to stay there long. My departure was hastened by the
advice of a man who knew me, and told he also knew my New Hampshire
scrape, and that I had better leave Portland as soon as possible. Half
an hour after this good advice I was on my way by cars to Canada. In
Canada I stayed in different small towns near the border, and "kept
moving," till I thought the New Hampshire matter had blown over a
little, or at least till they had given me up as a "gone case," and I
then reappeared in Troy.



CHAPTER IX. MARRYING TWO MILLINERS.

BACK IN VERMONT--FRESH TEMPTATIONS--MARGARET BRADLEY--WINE AND
WOMEN--A MOCK MARRIAGE IN TROY--THE FALSE CERTIFICATE--MEDICINE
AND MILLINERY--ELIZA GURNSEY--A SPREE AT SARATOGA--MARRYING ANOTHER
MILLINER--AGAIN ARRESTED OR BIGAMY--IN JAIL ELEVEN MONTHS--A TEDIOUS
TRIAL--FOUND GUILTY--APPEAL TO SUPREME COURT--TRYING TO BREAK OUT OF
JAIL--A GOVERNOR'S PROMISE--SECOND TRIAL--SENTENCE TO THREE YEARS'
IMPRISONMENT.



From Troy I went, first to Newburyport, Mass., where I had some
business, and where I remained a week, and then returned to Troy again.
Next I went to Bennington, Vt., to sell medicines and practice, and I
found enough to occupy me there for full two months. From Bennington to
Rutland, selling medicines on the way, and at Rutland I intended to stay
for some time. My oldest son was there well established in the medical
business, and I thought that both of us together might extend a wide
practice and make a great deal of money.

No doubt we might have done so, if I had minded my medical business
only, and had let matrimonial matters alone. I had just got rid of a
worthless woman in New Hampshire with a very narrow escape from State
prison. But, as my readers know by this time, all experience, even the
bitterest, was utterly thrown away upon me; I seemed to get out of one
scrape only to walk, with my eyes open, straight into another.

At the hotel where I went to board, there was temporarily staying a
woman, about thirty-two years old, Margaret Bradly, by name, who kept a
large millinery establishment in town. I became acquainted with her, and
she told me that she owned a house in the place, in which she and her
mother lived; but her mother had gone away on a visit, and as she did
not like to live alone she had come to the hotel to stay for a few days
till her mother returned. Margaret was a fascinating woman; she knew it,
and it was my miserable fate to become intimate, altogether too intimate
with this designing milliner.

I went to her store every day, sometimes two or three times a day, and
she always had in her backroom, wine or something stronger to treat me
with, and in the evening I saw her at the hotel. When her mother came
back, and Margaret opened her house again, I was a constant visitor. I
was once more caught; I was in love.

Matters went on in this way for several weeks, when one evening I told
her that I was going next day to Troy on business, and she said she
wanted to go there to buy some goods, and that she would gladly take the
opportunity to go with me, if I would let her. Of course, I was only too
happy; and the next day I and my son, and she and one of the young women
in her employ, who was to assist her in selecting goods, started for
Troy. When I called for her, just as we were leaving the house, the old
lady, her mother, called out:

"Margaret, don't you get married before you come back."

"I guess I will," was Margaret's answer, and we went, a very jovial
party of four, to Troy and put up at the Girard House, where we had
dinner together, and drank a good deal of wine. After dinner my son and
myself went to attend to our business, she and her young woman going to
make their purchases, and arranging to meet us at a restaurant at half
past four o'clock, when we would lunch preparatory to returning to
Rutland.

We met at the appointed place and hour, and had a very lively lunch
indeed, an orgie in fact, with not only enough to eat, but altogether
too much to drink. I honestly think the two women could have laid me and
my son under the table, and would have done it, if we had not looked out
for ourselves; as it was, we all drank a great deal and were very merry.
We were in a room by ourselves, and when we had been there nearly an
hour, it occurred to Margaret that it would be a good idea to humor the
old lady's dry joke about the danger of our getting married during this
visit to Troy.

"Henry," said she to my son; "Go out and ask the woman who keeps the
saloon where you can get a blank marriage certificate, and then get one
and bring it here, and we'll have some fun."

We were all just drunk enough to see that there was a joke in it, and
we urged the boy to go. He went to the woman, who directed him to a
stationer's opposite, and presently he came in with a blank marriage
certificate. We called for pen and ink and he sat down and filled out
the blank form putting in my name and Margaret Bradley's, signing it
with some odd name I have forgotten as that of the clergyman performing
the ceremony. He then signed his own name as a witness to the marriage,
and the young woman who was with us also witnessed it with her
signature. We had a great deal of fun over it, then more wine, and then
it was time for us to hurry to the depot to take the six o'clock train
for Rutland.

Reaching home at about eleven o'clock at night, we found the old lady
up, and waiting for Margaret. We went in and Margaret's first words
were:

"Well, mother! I'm married; I told you, you know, I thought I should be;
and here's my certificate."

The mother expressed no surprise--she knew her daughter better than
I did, then--but quietly congratulated her, while I said not a single
word. My son went to see his companion home, and, as I had not achieved
this latest greatness, but had it thrust upon me, I and my new found
"wife" went to our room. The next day I removed from the hotel to
Margaret's house and remained there during my residence in Rutland, she
introducing me to her friends as her husband, and seeming to consider it
an established fact.

Three weeks after this mock marriage, however, I told Margaret that I
was going to travel about the State a while to sell my medicines, and
that I might be absent for some time. She made no objections, and as I
was going with my own team she asked me to take some mantillas and a few
other goods which were a little out of fashion, and see if I could not
sell them for her. To be sure I would, and we parted on the best of
terms.

Behold rue now, not only a medical man and a marrying man, but also
a man milliner. When I could not dispose of my medicines, I tried
mantillas, and in the course of my tour I sold the whole of Margaret's
wares, faithfully remitting to her the money for the same. I think she
would have put her whole stock of goods on me to work off in the same
way; but I never gave her the opportunity to do so.

My journeying brought me at last to Montpelier where I proposed to stay
awhile and see if I could establish a practice. I had disposed of my
millinery goods and had nothing to attend to but my medicines--alas that
my professional acquirements as a marrying man should again have been
called in requisition. But it was to be. It was my fate to fall into the
hands of another milliner.

"Insatiate monster! would not one suffice?"

It seems not. There was a milliner at Rutland whose family and, friends
all believed to be my wife, though she knew she was not; and here in
Montpelier, was ready waiting, like a spider for a fly, another milliner
who was about to enmesh me in the matrimonial net. I had not been in
the place a week before I became acquainted with Eliza Gurnsey. I could
hardly help it, for she lived in the hotel where I stopped, and although
she was full thirty-five years old, she was altogether the most
attractive woman in the house. She was agreeable, good-looking,
intelligent, and what the vernacular calls "smart." At all events, she
was much too smart for me, as I soon found out.

She had a considerable millinery establishment which she and her younger
sister carried on, employing several women, and she was reputed to
be well off. Strange as it may seem in the light of after events, she
actually belonged to the church and was a regular attendant at the
services. But no woman in town was more talked about, and precisely what
sort of a woman she was may be estimated from the fact that I had known
her but little more than a week, when she proposed that she, her sister
and I should go to Saratoga together, and have a good time for a day or
two.

I was fairly fascinated with the woman and I consented. The younger
sister was taken with us, I thought at first as a cover, I knew
afterwards as a confederate, and Eliza paid all the bills, which were
by no means small ones, of the entire trip. We stopped in Saratoga at a
hotel, which is now in very different hands, but which was then kept
by proprietors who, in addition to a most excellent table and
accommodations, afforded their guests the opportunity, if they desired
it, of attending prayers every night and morning in one of the parlors.
This may have been the inducement which made Eliza insist upon going to
this house, but I doubt it.

For our stay at Saratoga, three or four days, was one wild revel. We
rode about, got drunk, went to the Lake, came back to the hotel, and
the second day we were there, Eliza sent her sister for a Presbyterian
minister, whose address she had somehow secured, and this minister came
to the hotel and married us. I presume I consented, I don't know, for I
was too much under the effect of liquor to know much of anything. I have
an indistinct recollection of some sort of a ceremony, and afterwards
Eliza showed me a certificate--no Troy affair, but a genuine document
signed by a minister residing in Saratoga, and witnessed by her sister
and some one in the hotel who had been called in. But the whole was like
a dream to me; it was the plot of an infamous woman to endeavor to make
herself respectable by means of a marriage, no matter to whom or how
that marriage was effected.

Meanwhile, the Montpelier papers had the whole story, one of them
publishing a glowing account of my elopement with Miss Gurnsey, and the
facts of our marriage at Saratoga was duly chronicled. This paper fell
into the hands of Miss Bradley, at Rutland, and as she claimed to be my
wife, and had parted with me only a little while before, when I went
out to peddle medicines and millinery, her feelings can be imagined. She
read the story and then aroused all Rutland. I had not been back from
Saratoga half an hour before I was arrested in the public house in
Montpelier and taken before a magistrate, on complaint of Miss Bradley,
of Rutland, that I was guilty of bigamy.

The examination was a long one, and as the facts which were then shown
appeared afterwards in my trial they need not be noted now. I had two
first-rate lawyers, but for all that, and with the plainest showing
that Margaret Bradley had no claim whatever to be considered my wife, I
was bound over in the sum of three thousand dollars to appear for
trial, and was sent to jail. There was a tremendous excitement about the
matter, and the whole town seemed interested.

To jail I went, Eliza going with me, and insisting upon staying; but the
jailer would not let her, nor was she permitted to visit me during my
entire stay there, at least she got in to see me but once. I made
every effort to get bail, but was unsuccessful. Eight long weary months
elapsed before my trial came on, and all this while I was in jail. My
trial lasted a week. The Bradley woman knew she was no more married to
me than she was to the man in the moon; but she swore stoutly that we
were actually wedded according to the certificate. On the other hand,
my son swore to all the facts about the Troy spree, and his buying and
filling out the certificate, which showed for itself that, excepting the
signature of the young woman who also witnessed it, it was entirely in
Henry's handwriting. I should have got along well enough so far as
the Bradley woman was concerned; but the prosecution had been put in
possession of all the facts relative to my first and worst marriage, and
the whole matter came up in this case. The District Attorney had sent
everywhere, as far even as Illinois, for witness with regard to that
marriage. It seemed as if all Vermont was against me. I have heard that
with the cost of witnesses and other expenses, my trial cost the state
more than five thousand dollars. My three lawyers could not save me.
After a week's trial the case went to the jury, and in four hours they
returned a verdict of "guilty."

My counsel instantly appealed the case to the Supreme Court, and,
meanwhile I went back to jail where I remained three months more. A few
days after I returned to jail a friend of mine managed to furnish me
with files and saws, and I went industriously to work at the gratings
of my window to saw my way out. I could work only at night, when the
keepers were away, and I covered the traces of my cuttings by filling in
with tallow. In two months I had everything in readiness for my escape.
An hour's more sawing at the bars would set me free. But just at that
time the Governor of the State, Fletcher, made a visit to the jail.
I told him all about my case. He assured me, after hearing all the
circumstances, that if I should be convicted and sentenced, he would
surely pardon me in the course of six or eight weeks. Trusting in this
promise, I made no further effort to escape though I could have done
so easily any night; but rather than run the risk of recapture, and a
heavier sentence if I should be convicted, I awaited the chances of the
court, and looked beyond for the clemency of the Governor.

Well, finally my case came up in the Supreme Court. It only occupied
a day, and the result was that I was sentenced for three years in the
State prison. I was remanded to jail, and five days from that time I was
taken from Montpelier to Windsor.



CHAPTER X. PRISON-LIFE IN VERMONT.

ENTERING PRISON--THE SCYTHE SNATH BUSINESS--BLISTERED HANDS--I
LEARN NOTHING--THREAT TO KILL THE SHOP--KEEPER--LOCKSMITHING--OPEN
REBELLION--SIX WEEKS IN THE DUNGEON--ESCAPE OF A PRISONER--IN THE
DUNGEON AGAIN--THE MAD MAN, HALL--HE ATTEMPTS TO MURDER THE DEPUTY--I
SAVE MOREY'S LIFE--HOWLING IN THE BLACK HOLE--TAKING OFF HALL'S
IRONS--A GHASTLY SPECTACLE--A PRISON FUNERAL--I AM LET ALONE--BETTER
TREATMENT--THE FULL TERM OF MY IMPRISONMENT.



We arrived at Windsor and I was safely inside of the prison at three
o'clock in the afternoon. Warden Harlow met me with a joke, to the
effect that, had it not been for my handcuffs he should have taken the
officer who brought me, to be the prisoner, I was so much the better
dressed of the two. He then talked very seriously to me for a long time.
He was sorry, and surprised, he said, to see a man of my appearance
brought to such a place for such a crime; he could not understand how a
person of my evident intelligence should get into such a scrape.

I told him that he understood it as well as I did, at all events; that
I could not conceive why I should get into these difficulties, one
after the other; but that I believed I was a crazy man on this one
subject--matrimonial monomania; that when I had gone through with one
of these scrapes, and had suffered the severe punishment that was almost
certain to follow, the whole was like a dream to me--a nightmare and
nothing more. With regard to what was before me in this prison I
should try and behave myself, and make the best of the situation; but I
notified the Warden that I did not mean to do one bit of work if I could
help it.

He took me inside, where my fine clothes were taken away, and I. was
dressed in the usual particolored prison uniform. I was told the rules,
and was warned that if I did not observe them it would go hard with
me. Then followed twenty-four hours solitary confinement, and the next
afternoon I was taken from my cell to a shop in which scythe snaths were
made.

It had transpired during my trial at Montpelier, that when I was a young
man, I was a blacksmith by trade. This information had been transmitted
to prison and I was at once put to work making heel rings. It was some
years since I had worked at a forge and handled a hammer. Consequently,
in three or four days, my hands were terribly blistered, and as the
Warden happened to come into the shop, I showed them to him, and quietly
told him that I would do that work no longer. He told me that I must do
it; he would make me do it. I answered that he might kill me, or punish
me in any way he pleased, but he could not make me do that kind of
labor, and I threw down my hammer and refused to work a moment longer.

The Warden left me and sent Deputy Warden Morey to try me. He approached
me in a kindly way, and I showed my blistered hands to him. He thought
that was the way to "toughen" me. I thought not, and said so, and,
moreover, told him I would never make another heel ring in that prison,
and I never did.

He sent me to my cell and I stayed there a week, till my hands were
well. Then the Deputy came to me and asked me if I was willing to learn
to hew out scythe snaths in the rough for the shavers, who finished
them? I said I would try. I went into the shop and was shown how the
work was to be done. Every man was expected to hew out fifty snaths in a
day. In three or four days the shop-keeper came and overlooked me while
I was working in my bungling way, and said if I couldn't do better than
that I must clear out of his shop and do something else. My reply was
that I did not understand the business, and had no desire or intention
to learn it. He sent for the Deputy Warden, who came and expressed
the opinion that I could not do anything. I said I was willing to do
anything I could understand.

"Do you understand anything?" asked the Deputy.

"Well, some things, marrying for instance," was my answer.

"I want no joking or blackguardism about this matter," said the Deputy;
"them simple fact is, you've got to work; if you don't we'll make you."

So I kept on at hewing, making no improvement, and in a day or two
more the shopkeeper undertook to show me how the work should be done. I
protested I never could learn it.

"You don't try; and I have a good mind to punish you."

The moment the shop-keeper said it I dropped the snath, raised my
axe, and told him that if he came one step nearer to me I would make
mincemeat of him. He thought it was advisable to stay where he was; but
one of the prison-keepers was in the shop, and as he came toward me I
warned him that he had better keep away.

All the men in the shop were ready to break out in insubordination; when
I threatened the shop keeper and the guard, they cheered; the Deputy
Warden was soon on the ground; he stood in the doorway a moment, and
then, in a kind tone called me to him. I had no immediate quarrel with
him, and so I dropped my axe and went to him. He told me that there
was no use of "making a muss" there, it incited the other prisoners to
insubordination, and was sure to bring severe punishment upon myself.
"Go and get your cap and coat," said he "and come with me."

"But if you are going to put me into that black hole of yours," I
exclaimed, "I won't go; you'll have to draw me there or kill me on the
way."

He promised he would not put me in the dungeon, he was only going to
put me in my cell, he said, and to my cell I went, willingly enough,
and stayed there a week, during which time I suppose everyone of my
shopmates thought I was in the dungeon, undergoing severe punishment for
my rebellions conduct.

I had learned now the worst lesson which a prisoner can learn--that is,
that my keepers were afraid of me. To a limited extent, it is true, I
was now my own master and keeper. In a few days Deputy Morey came to
me and asked me if I was "willing" to come out and work. I was sick
of solitary confinement, and longed to see the faces of men, even
prisoners: so I told him if I could get any work I could do I was
willing to try it, and would do as well as I knew how. He asked me if I
knew anything of locksmithing? I told him I had some taste for it, and
if he would show me his job I would let him see what I could do.

The fact is, I was a very fair amateur locksmith, and had quite
a fondness for fixing, picking, and fussing generally over locks.
Accordingly, when he gave me a lock to work upon to make it "play
easier," as he described it, I did the job so satisfactorily that I had
nearly every lock in the prison to take off and operate upon, if it was
nothing more than to clean and oil one. This business occupied my
entire time and attention for nearly three months. Then I repaired iron
bedsteads, did other iron work, and I was the general tinker of the
prison.

It came into my head, however, one day, that I might as well do nothing.
The prison fare was indescribably bad, almost as bad as the jail fare at
Easton. We lived upon the poorest possible salt beef for dinner, varied
now and then with plucks and such stuff from the slaughter houses, with
nothing but bread and rye coffee for breakfast and supper, and mush and
molasses perhaps twice a week.

I was daily abused, too, by the Warden, his Deputy, and his keepers.
They looked upon me as an ugly, insubordinate, refractory, rebellious
rascal, who was ready to kill any of them, and, worst of all, who would
not work. I determined to confirm their minds in the latter supposition,
and so one day I threw down my tools and refused to do another thing.

They dragged me to the dungeon and thrust me in. It was a wretched dark
hole, with a little dirty straw in one corner to lie upon. My entire
food and drink was bread and water. The man who brought it never spoke
to me. His face was the only one I saw during the livelong day. Day and
night were alike to me; I lost the run of time; but at long intervals,
once in eight or ten days, I suppose, the Deputy came to this hole and
asked me if I would come out and work.

"No, no!" I always answered, "never!" Then I paced the stone floor in
the dark, or lay on my straw. I lay there till my hips were worn raw.
No human being can conceive the agony, the suffering endured in this
dungeon. At last I was nearly blind, and was scarcely able to stand up.
I presume that the attendant who brought my daily dole of bread and my
cup of water, reported my condition. One day the door opened and I was
ordered out. They were obliged to bring me out; I was so reduced that I
was but the shadow of myself. They meant to cure my obstinacy or to kill
me, and had not quite succeeded in doing either.

There was no use in asking me if I would go to work then; I was just
alive. A few days in my own cell, in the daylight, and with something
beside bread and water to eat, partially restored me. I was then taken
into the shop where the snaths were finished by scraping and varnishing,
the lightest part of the work, but I would not learn, would not do,
would not try to do anything at all. They gave me up. The whole struggle
nearly killed me, but I beat them. I was turned into the halls and told
to do what I could, which, I knew well enough, meant what I would.

After that I worked about the halls and yard, sometimes sweeping, and
again carrying something, or doing errands for the keepers from one part
of the prison to another. I was what theatrical managers call a general
utility man, and, not at all strangely, for it is human nature, now
that I could do what I pleased, I pleased to do a great deal, and was
tolerably useful, and far more agreeable than I had been in the past.

There was a young fellow, twenty-two years of age, in one of the cells,
serving out a sentence of six years. When I was sweeping around I used
to stop and talk to him every day. One day he was missing. He had been
supposed to be sick or asleep for several hours, for apparently lie
lay in bed, and was lying very still. But that was only an ingeniously
constructed dummy. The young man himself had made a hole under his bed
into an adjoining vacant cell, the door of which stood open. He had
crawled through his hole, come out of the vacant cell door, and gone up
to the prison garret, where he found some old pieces of rope. These he
tied together, and getting out at the cupola upon the roof, he managed
to let himself down on the outside of the building and got away. He was
never recaptured. The Warden said that some one must have told him about
the adjoining vacant cell, with its always open door, else how would the
young man have known it?

I was accused of imparting this valuable information, and I suffered
four weeks' confinement in that horrible dungeon on the mere suspicion.
This made ten weeks in all of my prison-life in a hole in which I
suffered so that I hoped I should die there.

One of the prisoners was a desperate man, named Hall. He was a convicted
murderer, and was sentenced for life. He too, worked about in the prison
and the yards, dragging or carrying a heavy ball and chain. When bundles
of snaths were to be carried from one shop to the other in the various
processes of finishing, Hall had to do it, and to carry his ball and
chain as well, so that he was loaded like a pack-horse. No pack-horse
was ever so abused.

Of course he was ugly; the wardens and the keepers knew it, and
generally kept away from him.

I talked with him more than once, and he told me that with better
treatment he should be a better man. "Look at the loads which are put on
me every day," he would say; as if this ball and chain were not as much
as I can carry; and this for life, for life!

One day when Hall and I were working together in the prison, Deputy
Warden Morey came in and said something to him, and in a moment the man
sprung upon him. He had secured somehow, perhaps he had picked it up in
the yard, a pocket knife, and with this he stabbed the Warden, striking
him in the shoulder, arm, and where he could.

Morey was a man sixty-five years of age, and he made such resistance
as he could, crying out loudly for help. I turned, ran to Hall, and with
one blow of my fist knocked him nearly senseless; then help came and we
secured the mad man. Morey was profuse in protestations of gratitude to
me for saving his life.

There was a great excitement over this attempt to murder the Deputy, and
for a few hours, with wardens and keepers, I was a hero. I had been in
the prison more than a year, and was generally regarded as one of the
worst prisoners, one of the "hardest cases;" a mere chance had suddenly
made me one of the most commendable men within those dreary walls. As
for Hall, he was taken to the dungeon and securely chained by the feet
to a ring in the center of the stone floor. There is no doubt whatever
that the man was a raving maniac. He howled night and day so that he
could be heard everywhere in the prison--"Murder, murder! they are
murdering me in this black hole; why don't they take me out and kill
me?"

The Warden said it could not be helped; that the man must be kept there;
he was dangerous to himself and others; the dark cell was the only place
for him. So Hall stayed there and howled, his cries growing weaker from
day to day; by-and-by we heard him only at intervals, and after that
not at all.

One morning there was a little knot of men around the open dungeon door,
the Deputy Warden and two or three keepers. Mr. Morey called to me to go
and get the tools and come there and take off Hall's irons. I went into
the cell and in a few minutes I unfastened his feet from the ring;
then I took the shackles off his limbs. I thought he held his legs very
stiff, but knew he was obstinate, and only wondered he was so quiet.

Somebody brought in a candle and I looked at Hall's face. I never saw a
more ghastly sight. The blood from his mouth and nostrils had clotted
on the lower part of his face, and his wild eyes, fixed and glassy, were
staring at the top wall of the dungeon. He must have been dead several
hours. The Deputy and the rest knew he was dead--the man who carried in
the bread and water told them--me it came with a shock from which I did
not soon recover.

They buried Hall in the little graveyard which was in the yard of the
prison. An Episcopal clergyman, who was chaplain of the prison, read the
burial service over him. The prisoners were brought out to attend the
homely funeral. The ball and chain, all the personal property left by
Hall, were put aside for the next murderer sentenced for life, or for
the next "ugly" prisoner. "If I were only treated better, and not abused
so, I should be a better man." This is what Hall used to say to me
whenever he had an opportunity. The last and worst and best in that
prison had been done for him now.

From the day when I rescued Morey from the hands of Hall, his whole
manner changed towards me, and he treated me with great kindness,
frequently bringing me a cup of tea or coffee, and something good to
eat. He also promised to present the circumstances of the Hall affair to
the Governor, and to urge my pardon, but I do not think he ever did so,
at least I heard nothing of it. When I pressed the matter upon Morey's
attention he said it would do no good till I had served out half my
sentence, and then he would see what could be done.

I served half my sentence, and then the other half, every day of it. But
during the last two years I had very little to complain of except the
loss of my liberty. I was put into the cook shop where I could get
better food, and I did pretty much what I pleased. By general consent
I was let alone. They had found out that ill usage only made me "ugly,"
while kindness made me at least behave myself. And so the three weary
years of my confinement were on to an end.



CHAPTER XI. ON THE TRAMP.

THE DAY OF MY DELIVERANCE--OUT OF CLOTHES--SHARING WITH A BEGGAR--A
GOOD FRIEND--TRAMPING THROUGH THE SNOW--WEARY WALKS--TRUSTING TO
LUCK--COMFORT AT CONCORD--AT MEREDITH BRIDGE--THE BLAISDELLS--LAST
OF THE "BLOSSOM" BUSINESS--MAKING MONEY AT PORTSMOUTH--REVISITING
WINDSOR--AN ASTONISHED WARDEN--MAKING FRIENDS OF OLD ENEMIES--INSPECTING
THE PRISON--GOING TO PORT JERVIS.



At last the happy day of my deliverance came. The penalty for pretending
to marry one milliner and for being married by another milliner was
paid. My sentence was fulfilled. I had looked forward to this day for
months. Of all my jail and prison life in different States, this in
Vermont was the hardest, the most severe. My obstinacy, no doubt, did
much at first to enhance my sufferings, and it was the accident only
of my saving Morey's life that made the last part of my imprisonment
a little more tolerable. When I was preparing to go, it was discovered
that the fine suit of clothes I wore into the prison had been given by
mistake or design to some one else, and my silk hat and calf-skin boots
had gone with the clothes. But never mind! I would have gone out into
the world in rags--my liberty was all I wanted then. The Warden gave me
one of his own old coats, a ragged pair of pantaloons, and a new pair
of brogan shoes. He also gave me three dollars, which was precisely a
dollar a year for my services, and this was more than I ever meant to
earn there. Thus equipped and supplied I was sent out into the streets
of Windsor.

I had not gone half a mile before I met a poor old woman whom I had
known very well in Rutland. She recognized me at once, though I know I
was sadly changed for the worse. She was on her way to Fall River, where
she had relatives, and where she hoped for help, but had no money to pay
her fare, so I divided my small stock with her, and that left me just
one dollar and a half with which to begin the world again. I went down
to the bridge and the toll--gatherer gave me as much as I could eat,
twenty five cents in money, and a pocket-full of food to carry with me.
I was heading, footing rather, for Meredith Bridge in New Hampshire.
It was in the month of December; and I was poorly clad and without an
overcoat. I must have walked fifteen miles that afternoon, and just at
nightfall I came to a wayside public house and ventured to go in. As
I stood by the fire, the landlord stepped up and slapping me on the
shoulder, said:

"Friend, you look as if you were in trouble; step up and have something
to drink."

I gladly accepted the invitation to partake of the first glass of liquor
I had tasted in three years. It was something, too, everything to be
addressed thus kindly. I told this worthy landlord my whole story; how
I had been trapped by the two milliners, and how I had subsequently
suffered. He had read something about it in the papers; he felt as if
he knew me; he certainly was sorry for me; and he proved his sympathy
by giving me what then seemed to me the best supper I had ever eaten,
a good bed, a good breakfast, a package of provisions to carry with me,
and then sent me on my way with a comparatively light heart.

It rained, snowed, and drizzled all day long. I tramped through the wet
snow ankle deep, but made nearly forty miles before night, and then came
to a public house which I knew well. When I was in the bar-room drying
myself and warming my wet and half-frozen feet, I could not but think
how, only a few years before, I had put up at that very house, with a
fine horse and buggy of my own in the stable, and plenty of money in my
pocket. The landlord's face was familiar enough, but he did not know
me, nor, under my changed circumstances, did I desire that he should.
Supper, lodging, and breakfast nearly exhausted my small money capital;
I was worn and weary, too, and the next day was able to walk but twenty
miles, all told. On the way, at noon I went into a farm house to warm
myself. The woman had just baked a short-cake which stood on the
hearth, toward which I must have cast longing eyes, for the farmer said:

"Have you had your dinner, man?"

"No, and I have no money to buy any."

"Well, you don't need money here. Wife, put that short-cake and some
butter on the table; now, my man, fall to and eat as much as you like."

I was very hungry, and I declare I ate the whole of that short-cake.
I told these people that I had been in better circumstances, and that
I was not always the poor, ragged, hungry wretch I appeared then. They
made we welcome to what I had eaten and when I went away filled my
pockets with food. At night I was about thirty miles above Concord. I
had no money, but trusting to luck, I got on the cars--the conductor
came, and when he found I had no ticket, he said he must put me off. It
was a bitter night and I told him I should be sure to freeze to death.
A gentleman who heard the conversation at once paid my fare, for which I
expressed my grateful thanks, and I went to Concord.

On my arrival I went to a hotel and told the landlord I wanted to stay
there till the next day, when a conductor whom I knew would be going to
Meredith Bridge; that I was going with him, and that he would probably
pay my bill at the hotel. "All right," said the landlord, and he gave me
my supper and a room. The next noon my friend, the conductor, came and
when I first spoke to him he did not recognize me; I told him who I
was, but to ask me no questions as to how I came to appear in those old
clothes, and to be so poor; I wanted to borrow five dollars, and to go
with him to Meredith Bridge. He greeted me very cordially, handed me a
ten-dollar Bill--twice as much as I asked for--said he was not going to
the Bridge till next day, and told me meanwhile, to go to the hotel and
make myself comfortable.

I went back to the hotel, paid my bill, stayed there that day and night,
and the next morning "deadheaded," with my friend the conductor to
Meredith Bridge. Everybody knew me there. The hotel-keeper made me
welcome to his house, and said I could stay as long as I liked.

"Say, dew ye ever cure anybody, Doctor?" asked my old friend, the
landlord, and he laughed and nudged me in the ribs, and asked me to take
some of his medicine from the bar, which I immediately did.

I was at home now. But the object of my visit was to see if I could
not collect some of my old bills in that neighborhood, amounting in the
aggregate to several hundred dollars. They were indeed old bills of five
or six years' standing, and I had very little hope of collecting much
money. I went first to Lake Village, and called on Mr. John Blaisdell,
the husband of the woman whom I had cured of the dropsy, in accordance,
as she believed at the time, with her prophetic dream. Blaisdell didn't
know me at first; then he wanted to know what my bill was; I told him
one hundred dollars, to say nothing of six years' interest; he said he
had no money, though he was regarded as a rich man, and in fact was.

"But sir," said I, "you see me and how poor I am. Give me something on
account. I am so poor that I even borrowed this overcoat from the
tailor in the village, that I might present a little more respectable
appearance when I called on my old patients to try to collect some of my
old bills. Please to give me something."

But he had no money. He would pay for the overcoat; I might tell the
tailor so; and afterwards he gave me a pair of boots and an old shirt.
This was the fruit which my "blossom" of years before brought at last.
I saw Mrs. Blaisdell, but she said she could do nothing for me. She had
forgotten what I had done for her.

Of all my bills in that vicinity, with a week's dunning, I collected
only three dollars; but a good friend of mine, Sheriff Hill, went around
and succeeded in making up a purse of twenty dollars which he put into
my hands just as I was going away. My old landlord wanted nothing for my
week's board; all he wanted was to know "if I ever cured anybody;" and
when I told him I did, "sometimes" he insisted upon my taking more of
his medicine, and he put up a good bottle of it for me to carry with me
on my journey.

With my twenty dollars I went to Portsmouth, where I speedily felt that
I was among old and true friends. I had not been there a day before I
was called upon to take care of a young man who was sick, and after a
few weeks charge of him I received in addition to my board and expenses,
three hundred dollars. I was now enabled to clothe myself handsomely,
and I did so and went to Newburyport, where I remained several weeks and
made a great deal of money.

In the spring I went to White River Junction, and while I was in
the hotel taking a drink with some friends, who should come into the
bar-room but the Lake Village tailor from whom I had borrowed the
overcoat which I had even then on my back. I was about to thank him for
his kindness to me when he took me aside and said reproachfully:

"Doctor, you wore away my overcoat and this is it, I think."

"Good heavens! didn't John Blaisdell pay you for the coat? He told me he
would; its little enough out of what he owes me."

"He never said a word to me about it," was the reply. I told the tailor
the circumstances; I did not like to let him to know that I had then
about seven hundred dollars in my pocket; I wished to appear poor
as long as there was a chance to collect any of my Meredith and Lake
Village bills; so I offered him three dollars to take back the coat. He
willingly consented and that was the last of the "Blossom" business with
the Blaisdells.

I was bound not to leave this part of the country without revisiting
Windsor, and I went there, stopping at the best house in the town, and,
I fear, "putting on airs" a little. I had suffered so much in this
place that I wanted to see if there was any enjoyment to be had there.
Satisfaction there was, certainly--the satisfaction one feels in going
back under the most favorable circumstances, to a spot where he has
endured the very depths of misery. After a good dinner I set out to
visit the prison. Here was the very spot in the street where, only a few
months before, I, a ragged beggar, had divided my mere morsel of money
with the poor woman from Rutland. What change in my circumstances those
few months had wrought. I had recovered my health which bad food, ill
usage, and imprisonment had broken down, and was in the best physical
condition. The warden's old coat and pantaloons had been exchanged for
the finest clothes that money would buy. I had a good gold watch and
several hundred dollars in my pocket. I had seen many of my old friends,
and knew that they were still my friends, and I was fully restored to
my old position. My three years' imprisonment was only a blank in my
existence; I had begun life again and afresh, precisely where I left off
before I fell into the hands of the two Vermont milliners.

All this was very pleasant to reflect upon; but do not believe I thought
even then, that the reason for this change in my circumstances, and
changes for the better, was simply because I had minded my business and
had let women alone.

When I called on Warden Harlow, and courteously asked to be shown about
the prison, he got up and was ready to comply with my request, when he
looked me full in the face and started back in amazement:

"Well, I declare! Is this you?"

"Yes, Warden Harlow; but I want you to understand that while I am here
I do not intend to do a bit of work, and you can't make me. You may as
well give it up first as last; I won't work anyhow."

The Warden laughed heartily, and sent for Deputy Morey who came in to
"see a gentleman," and was much astonished to find the prisoner, who,
two years before, had saved his life from the hands and knife of the
madman Hall. I spent a very pleasant hour with my old enemies, and
I took occasion to give them a hint or two with regard to the proper
treatment of prisoners. I then made the rounds of the prison, and went
into the dungeon where I had passed so many wretched hours for weeks
at a time. The warden and his deputy congratulated me upon my improved
appearance and prospects, and hoped that my whole future career would be
equally prosperous.

Nor did I forget to call up my friend in need and friend indeed in
the toll-house at the bridge. I stayed three or four days in Windsor,
finding it really a charming place, and I was almost sorry to leave it.
But my only purpose in going there, that is to revisit the prison, was
accomplished, and I started for New York, and went from there to Port
Jervis, where I met my eldest son.



CHAPTER XII. ATTEMPT TO KIDNAP SARAH SCHEIMER'S BOY.

STARTING TO SEE SARAH--THE LONG SEPARATION--WHAT I LEARNED ABOUT
HER--HER DRUNKEN HUSBAND--CHANGE OF PLAN--A SUDDENLY--FORMED
SCHEME--I FIND SARAH'S SON--THE FIRST INTERVIEW--RESOLVE TO
KIDNAP THE BOY--REMONSTRANCES OF MY SON HENRY--THE ATTEMPT--A
DESPERATE STRUGGLE--THE RESCUE--ARREST OF HENRY--MY FLIGHT
INTO PENNSYLVANIA--SENDING ASSISTANCE TO MY SON--RETURN TO PORT
JERVIS--BAILING HENRY--HIS RETURN TO BELVIDERE--HE IS BOUND OVER TO BE
TRIED FOR KIDNAPPING--MY FOLLY.



After I had been in Port Jervis three or four days I matured a plan that
had long been forcing in my mind, and that was, to try and see Sarah
Scheimer once more, or at least to find out something about her and
about our son. The boy, if he was living, must be about ten years of
age. I had never seen him; nor, since the night when I was taken out of
bed and carried to the Easton jail had I ever seen Sarah, or even heard
from her, except by the message the Methodist minister brought to me
from her the day after I was released from jail. In the long interval
I had married the Newark widow, and had served a brief term in the New
Jersey State prison for doing it; I had married Mary Gordon, in New
Hampshire, and had run away, not only from her, but from constables and
the prison in that state; the mock marriage with the Rutland woman at
Troy, and the altogether too real marriage with the Montpelier milliner
had followed; I had spent three wretched years in the Vermont prison at
Windsor; and numerous other exciting adventures had checkered my career.
What had happened to Sarah and her son during all this while? There was
not a week in the whole time since our sudden separation when I had
not thought of Sarah; and now I was near her old home, with means at
my command, leisure on my hands, and I was determined to know something
about her and the child.

So long a time had elapsed and I was so changed in my personal
appearance that I had little fear of being recognized by any one in
Pennsylvania or the adjoining part of New Jersey, who would molest me.
The old matters must have been pretty much forgotten by all but the very
few who were immediately interested in them. It was safe to make the
venture at all events, and, I resolved to make the venture to see and
learn what I could.

I had the idea in my mind that if Sarah was alive and well, and free,
I should be able to induce her to fulfil her promise to come to me, and
that we might go somewhere and settle down and live happily together. At
any rate, I would try to see her and our child.

I did not communicate a word of all this to my son Henry. I told him I
was going to New Jersey to visit some friends, to look for business, and
I would like to have him accompany me. He consented; I hired a horse and
carriage, and one bright morning we started. I had no friends to visit,
no business to do, except to see Sarah--the dearest and best--loved of
all my wives.

When we reached Water Gap I found an old acquaintance in the landlord of
the hotel, and I told him where I was going, and what I hoped to do. He
knew the Scheimers, knew all that had happened eleven years before, and
he told me that Sarah had married again, seven years ago, and was the
mother of two more children. She lived on a farm, half a mile from
Oxford, and her husband who had married her for her money, and had
been urged upon her by her parents, was a shiftless, worthless, drunken
fellow. The boy--my boy--was alive and well, and was with his mother.

This intelligence changed, or rather made definite my plan. Sarah was
nothing to me now. The boy was everything. I must see him, and if he was
what he was represented to be, a bright little fellow, I determined that
he should no longer remain in the hands and under the control of his
drunken step-father, but I would carry him away with me if I could. It
was nearly noon when we arrived at Oxford, and going to my old quarters,
I found that "Boston Yankee," had long since left the place. There was
a new landlord, and I saw no familiar faces about the house; all was new
and strange to me. I made inquiries, and soon found out that Sarah's
boy went to a school in town not far from the hotel, and I went there to
"prospect," leaving Henry at the public house.

It was noon now, and fifty or more boys were trooping out of school. I
carefully scanned the throng. The old proverb has it that it is a wise
child who knows its own father; but it is not so difficult for a father
to know his own children. The moment I put my eyes on Sarah's son, I
knew him; he was the very image of me; I could have picked him out of a
thousand. I beckoned to the boy and he came to me. He was barefoot; and
his very toes betrayed him, for they "overrode" just as mine did; but
his face was enough and would have been evidence of his identity as my
son in any court in Christendom.

"Do you know me, my little man?" said I.

"No, sir, I do not."

"Do you know what was your mother's name before she was married?"

"Yes Sir, it was Sarah Scheimer."

"Do you know that the man with whom you live is not your rather?"

"Oh, yes, Sir, I know that; mother always told me so; but she never told
me who my father was."

"My son," said I taking him in my arms, "I am your father; wait about
here a few minutes till I can go and get my horse and carriage, and I
will take you to ride."

I ran over to the hotel; ordered my horse to be brought to the door at
once, got into the wagon with Henry and told him that Sarah Scheimer's
boy was just across the way, and that I was going to carry him off with
us. Henry implored me not to do it, and said it was dangerous. I never
stopped to think of danger when my will impelled me. I did not know that
at that moment, men who had noticed my excited manner, and who knew I
was "up to something," were watching me from the hotel piazza. I drove
over where the boy was waiting, called him to me, and Henry held the
reins while I put out my hands to pull the boy into the carriage. Two of
the men who were watching me came at once, one of them taking the horse
by the head, and the other coming to me and demanding:

"What are you going to do with that boy?"

"Take him with me; he is my son."

"No you don't," said the man, and he laid hold of the boy and attempted
to pull him out of the wagon. I also seized the lad who began to scream.
In the struggle for possession, I caught up the whip and struck the man
with the handle, felling him to the ground. All the while the other man
was shouting for assistance. The crowd gathered. The boy was roughly
torn from me, in spite of my efforts to retain him. Henry was thoroughly
alarmed; and while the mob were trying to pull us also out of the
carriage he whipped the horse till he sprang through the crowd and was
well off in a moment.

"Get out of town as fast as you can drive," said I to Henry.

We were not half an hour in reaching Belvidere. There I stopped
to breathe the horse a few minutes, and Henry insisted that he was
starving, and must have something to eat; he would go into the hotel he
said, and get some dinner. I told him it was madness to do it; but he
would not move an inch further on the road till he had some dinner. He
went into the dining room, and I paced up and down the piazza, nervous,
anxious, fearing pursuit, dreading capture, well knowing what would
happen when those Jerseymen should get hold of me and find out who I
was. At that moment I saw the pursuers coming rapidly up the road. I
called to my son:

"Henry, Henry! for God's sake come out here, quick!"

But he thought I was only trying to frighten him so as to hurry him away
from his dinner, and get him on the road, and he paid no attention to my
summons. I knew that I was the man who was wanted, and, without waiting
for Henry, I jumped into my wagon and drove off. I just escaped, that's
all. The moment I left, my pursuers were at the door. I looked back and
saw them drag my son out of the house, and take him away with them. I
turned my horse's head towards the Belvidere Bridge. All the country
about there was as familiar to me as the county I was born in. I knew
every road, and I had no fear of being caught. Once across the bridge
and in Pennsylvania, and I was comparatively safe, unless I myself
should be kidnapped as I was at midnight, only a little way from this
very spot, eleven years before. Here was an opportunity now to rest and
reflect. Confound those Scheimers and all their blood! Was I never to
see the end of the scrapes that family would get me into, or which I was
to get myself into, on account of the Scheimers?

Surely they could not harm Henry. They might have taken him merely in
the hope of drawing me back to try to clear him, or rescue him, and then
they would get hold of the man they wanted. My son had done nothing. He
did not even know of the contemplated abduction till five minutes before
it was attempted, and then he protested against it. He only held the
horse when I pulled the lad into the wagon.

Nothing showed so completely the consciousness of his own entire
innocence in the matter, as the coolness with which he sat down to his
dinner in Belvidere, and insisted upon remaining when I warned him of
our danger. These facts shown, any magistrate before whom he might be
taken, must let him go at once. I thought, perhaps, if I waited a few
hours where I was, he would be sure to rejoin me, and we could then
return to Port Jervis without Sarah's son to be sure; but, otherwise, no
worse off than we were when we set out on this ill-starred expedition
in the morning.

All this seemed so plain to me that I sent over to Belvidere for a
lawyer, who soon came across the bridge to see me, and to him I narrated
the whole circumstances of the case from, beginning to end. I asked him
if I had not a right to carry off the boy whom I knew to be my own? His
reply was that he would not stop to discuss that question; all he knew
was that there was a great hue and cry after me for kidnapping the boy;
that my son was seized and held for aiding and abetting in the attempted
abduction; and he advised me, as a friend, to leave that part of the
country as soon as possible. I gave him fifty dollars to look after
Henry's case. He thought, considering how little, and that little
involuntarily, my son had to do with the matter, he might be got off; he
would do all he could for him anyhow. He then returned to Belvidere, and
I took the road north.

When I arrived at Port Jervis I detailed to my landlord the whole
occurrences of the day--what I had tried to do, and how miserably I had
failed, and asked him what was to be done next. He said "nothing;" we
could only wait and see what happened.

The day following I received a letter from the Belvidere lawyer
informing me that Henry had been examined, had been bound over in
the sum of three hundred dollars to take his trial on a charge of
kidnapping, and he was then in the county jail. I at once showed this
letter to the landlord, and he offered to go down with another man to
Belvidere and see about the bail. I gave him three hundred dollars,
which he took with him and put into the bands of a resident there who
became bail, and in a day or two Henry came back with them to Port
Jervis.

My son was frantic; he had been roughly treated; and to think, he said,
that he should be thrust into the common jail and kept there two days
with all sorts of scoundrels, when he had done actually nothing! He
would go back there, stand his trial, and prove his innocence, if
he died for it. He reproached me for attempting to carry off the boy
against his advice and warning; he knew we should into trouble; but he
would show them that he had nothing to do with it; that's what he would
do.

Now this was precisely what I did not wish to have him do. A trial of
this case, even if Henry should come off scott free, would be certain to
revive the whole of the old Scheimer story, which had nearly died away,
and which I had no desire to have brought before the public again in
any way whatever. The bail bond I was willing, eager even to forfeit, if
that would end the matter. But Henry was sure they couldn't touch him,
and he meant to have the three hundred dollars returned to me.

Seeing how sensitive the boy was on the subject, and how bent he was
on proving his innocence, I thought it best to draw him away from the
immediate locality, and so, in the course of a week, I persuaded him to
go to New York with me, and we afterward went to Maine for a few weeks
to sell my medicines. This Maine trip was a most lucrative one, which
was very fortunate, for the money I made there, to the amount of
several hundred dollars, was shortly needed for purposes which I did not
anticipate when I put the money by.

We returned to New York, and I supposed that Henry had given up all idea
of attempting to "prove his innocence;" indeed we had no conversation
about the kidnapping affair for several weeks. But he slipped away from
me. One day I came back to the hotel, and, inquiring for him, was told
at the office he had left word for me that he had gone to Belvidere. A
letter from him a day or two afterward confirmed this, to me, unhappy
intelligence. The time was near at hand for his trial, and he had gone
and given himself up to the authorities. He wrote to me again that he
had sent word about his situation to his mother--my first and worst
wife--and she and his sister were already with him.

Of course it was impossible for me to go there, if there were no other
reasons, I was too immediately interested in this affair to be present,
and I had no idea of undergoing a trial and a certain conviction for
myself. But I sent down a New York lawyer with one hundred dollars,
directing him to employ council there, and to advise and assist as much
as he could. Meanwhile, I remained in New York, anxious, it is true, yet
almost certain that it would be impossible, under the circumstances, to
convict Henry of the kidnapping for which he was indicted. He had not
even assisted in the affair, and was sure his counsel would be able to
so convince the court and jury.

And reviewing the whole matter, now in my cooler moments, this scheme of
trying to carry away Sarah's son, seemed to be as foolish, useless, and
mad, as any one of my marrying adventures. Till I picked him out from
among his schoolmates, I had never seen the child at all. When I started
from Port Jervis to go down, as I supposed, into Pennsylvania, I had no
more idea of kidnapping the boy than I had of robbing a sheep-fold.
It was only when the landlord at Water Gap told me that Sarah had
remarried, and was wedded to a worthless, drunken husband, that I
conceived the plan of removing the boy from such associations. I was
going to bring him up in a respectable manner. Alas! I did not succeed
even in bringing him away.



CHAPTER XIII. ANOTHER WIDOW.

WAITING FOR THE VERDICT--MY SON SENT TO STATE PRISON--WHAT SARAH WOULD
HAVE DONE--INTERVIEW WITH MY FIRST WIFE--HELP FOR HENRY--THE BIDDEFORD
WIDOW--HER EFFORT TO MARRY ME--OUR VISIT TO BOSTON--A WARNING--A
GENEROUS GIFT--HENRY PARDONED--CLOSE OF THE SCHEIMER ACCOUNT--VISIT TO
ONTARIO COUNTY--MY RICH COUSINS--WHAT MIGHT HAVE BEEN--MY BIRTH--PLACE
REVISITED.



I waited with nervous impatience for the close of the trial in New
Jersey, when I hoped to welcome my son Henry to New York. It was
so plain a case, as it seemed to me, and must appear, I thought, to
everybody, that I hardly doubted his instant acquittal. But very shortly
the New York lawyer whom I had sent to Belvidere, came back and brought
terrible news. Henry had been tried, and notwithstanding the fairest
showing in his favor, he was convicted and sentenced to eighteen months
imprisonment at Trenton.

As it appeared, it was I really, and not Henry, who was on trial. The
circumstances of the desperate struggle, and my knocking down one of
the men with the butt of my whip, were conspicuous in the case. Even
the little boy was put on the stand, and was made to testify against his
older half-brother. Henry himself was astounded at the result of the
trial, and was firmly convinced that instead of "proving his innocence"
to Jersey jurymen, he had better have let his innocence go by default.
We never even got back again the three hundred dollars which had been
put into the hands of the man who went bail for Henry when he was bound
over for trial. For us, it was bad business from beginning to end.

Henry wrote a letter to me, that just before his trial, before he had
delivered himself up, and while he was still under bail, he had gone to
see Sarah Scheimer on the little farm which was bought with her money,
and was worked, so far as it was worked at all, by her drunken husband.
The family were even poorer than the landlord at Water Gap had reported.
Sarah herself was miserable and unhappy. She told Henry, when he
informed her who he was, that if I had wanted to see her or her son, I
should have been welcome. She would have been very glad to have had me
take the boy and clothe him decently; but she could not part with him,
and would not have let me take him away; still, I could see him at any
time, and as often as I liked, and the boy should grow up to know and to
look upon me as his father.

And this, really, was all I desired, all I wanted; and it was all easily
within my grasp, ready in fact to be put into my hands, and I had gone
ahead in my usual mad, blundering way, acting, not only without advice,
but against such advice as came from Henry at the last moment, and had
alienated the mother from me, lost the boy, and had sent Henry, who was
wholly innocent, to state prison for eighteen months.

The poor fellow was take to Trenton and was put into the prison where
I had spent seven months. He was almost crazy when he got there. His
mother and sister went with him, and took lodgings in the place so as to
be near him, to render him any assistance that might be in their power.

I had been idle now for some weeks in New York, and I went back to
Maine, to Biddeford, where I lad a good practice. I picked up a good
deal of money, and in two months I returned to New York to make a brief
visit, and to see if something could not be done for the release of
Henry from prison. At my solicitation a friend of mine wrote to
Trenton to Henry's mother to come on to New York, and meet me at the
Metropolitan Hotel on a specified day, to transact some business. She
came, and we met for the first time in several years. We met now simply
on business, and there was no expression of sentiment or feeling on
either side. We cared nothing for each other. I commended her for her
devotion to Henry, and then told her I believed, if the proper efforts
were made, he could be pardoned out of prison. I told her what lawyer
and other persons to see, and how to proceed in the matter. I gave her
the most minute instructions, and then handed her five hundred dollars
with which to fee her lawyer, and to pay her and her daughter's living
expenses in Trenton. She was grateful for the money, and was only too
glad to go to work for Henry; she would have done it long ago if she had
only known what to do. We then parted, and I have never seen the woman,
since that day.

This business transacted, I at once returned to my practice at
Biddeford. Among my patients was a wealthy widow, "fat, fair, and
forty," and I had not attended her long before a warm affection sprung
up between us, and in time, when the widow recovered, we began to think
we were in love with each other. I confess that I agreed to marry
her; but it was to be at some distant day--a very distant day as I
intended--for, strange as it may seem, and as it did seem to me, I had
at last learned the lesson that I had better let matrimony alone. I had
married too many wives, widows, milliners, and what not, already,
and had suffered too severely for so doing. I meant that my Vermont
imprisonment, the worst of all, should be the last.

So I only "courted" the widow, calling upon her almost every day, and
I was received and presented to her acquaintances as her affianced
husband. Her family and immediate friends were violently opposed to the
match, thereby showing their good sense. I was also informed that they
knew something of my previous history, and I was warned that I had
better not undertake to marry the widow. Bless their innocent hearts! I
had no idea of doing it. I was daily amazed at my own common sense. My
memory was active now; all my matrimonial mishaps of the past, with all
the consequences, were ever present to my mind, and never more present
than when was in the company of the fascinating widow. As for her,
the more her relatives opposed the match, the more she was bent upon
marrying me. Her family, she, said, were afraid they were going to lose
her property, but she would never give them a cent of it, anyhow, and
she would marry when and whom she pleased.

Not "when," exactly; because, as she protested she would marry me, I
had something to say about it; I had been run away with by a milliner
in Vermont, and I had no idea of beings forcibly wedded by a widow in
Maine. I pleaded that my business was not sufficiently established; I
was liable to be called away from time to time; I had affairs to arrange
in New York and elsewhere before I could settle down; and so the happy
day was put off to an indefinite future time.

By-and-by I had business in Boston, and the widow declared that she
would go with me; she wanted to visit her friend's there and do some
shopping; and without making particular mention of her intention to her
relatives, she went with me, and we were in Boston together more
than two weeks. At the end of that time she returned to Biddeford and
notified her friends treat she was married to the doctor, though she had
no certificate, not even a Troy one, to show for it.

I deemed it advisable not to go back with her, but went to Worcester for
a while. In a few days I went to Biddeford, keeping somewhat close, for
I did not care to meet any of the relatives, and at night I called upon
the widow. She told me that her family had raised a tremendous fuss
about me, and had learned as much as they, and indeed she, wanted to
know about my adventures in Vermont and New Hampshire. They had not gone
back of that, but that was enough. It was dangerous, she told me, for me
to stay there; I was sure to be arrested; I had better get away from the
place as soon as possible. We might meet again by-and-by, but unless I
wanted to be arrested I must leave, the place that very night. She gave
me seven hundred dollars, pressed the money upon me, and I parted from
her, returning to Worcester, and going from there to Boston. Besides
what the widow bad given me, I had made more than one thousand dollars
in Maine, and was comparatively well off.

Then came the joyful intelligence that Henry was released. His mother
had worked for him night and day. She bad drawn up a petition, secured
a large number of sterling signatures, had gone with her counsel to see
the Governor, had presented the petition and all the facts in the case,
and the Governor had granted a pardon. Henry served only six months of
the eighteen for which he was sentenced, and very soon after I received
word that he was free, he came to me in Boston, stayed a few days, and
then went home to his mother in Unadilla.

With the release of my son, I considered the Scheimer account closed,
and I have never made any effort to see Sarah or our boy since that
time.

From Boston I went to Pittsford, Ontario County, N. Y., where I had many
friends, who knew nothing about any of my marriages or misfortunes, my
arrests or imprisonments. I went visiting merely, and enjoyed myself so
much that I stayed there nearly three months, going about the country,
and practicing a little among my friends. I was never happier than I was
during this time. I was free from prisons, free from my wives, and
free from care. As a matrimonial monomaniac I now looked upon myself as
cured.

Among the friends whom I visited in Ontario County, and with whom I
passed several pleasant weeks, were two cousins of mine whom I had not
seen for many years, since we were children in fact, but who gave me a
most cordial welcome, and made much of me while I was there. They knew
absolutely nothing of my unhappy history--no unpleasant rumor even
respecting me, had ever penetrated that quiet quarter of the State. I
told them what I pleased of my past career, from boyhood to the present
time, and to them I was only a tolerably successful doctor, who made
money enough to live decently and dress well, and who was then suffering
from overwork and badly in need of recuperation. This, indeed, was the
ostensible reason for my visit to Ontario. I was somewhat shattered; my
old prison trials and troubles began to tell upon me. I used to think
sometimes that I was a little "out of my head;" I certainly was so
whenever I entered upon one of my matrimonial schemes, and I must have
been as mad as a March hare when I attempted to kidnap Sarah Scheimer's
boy. After all the excitement and suffering of the past few years, I
needed rest, and here I found it.

My cousins were more than well-to-do farmers; they were enormously
rich in lands and money. Just after the war of 1812, their father,
my uncle, and my own father, had come to this, then wild and almost
uninhabited, section of the State to settle. Soon after they arrived
there my father's wife died, and this loss, with the general loneliness
of the region, to say nothing of the fever and ague, soon drove my
father back to Delaware County to his forge for a living, and to the
day of his death he was nothing more than a hard-working,
hand-to-mouth-living, common blacksmith.

But my uncle stayed there, and, as time went on, he bought hundreds of
acres of land for a mere song, which were now immensely valuable, and
had made his children almost the richest people in that region. My
Cousins were great farmers, extensive raisers of stock, wool-growers,
and everything else that could make them prosperous. There seemed to be
no end to their wealth, and their fiat farms, spread out on every side
as far as the eye could see.

And if my father had only stayed there, I could not help but think what
a different life mine might have been. Instead of being the adventurer
I was, and had been ever since I separated from my first and worst
wife--doing well, perhaps, for a few weeks or a few months, and then
blundering into a mad marriage or other difficulty which got me into
prison; well-to-do to-day and to-morrow a beggar--I, too, might
have been rich and respectable, and should have, saved myself a world of
suffering. This was but a passing thought which did not mar my visit,
or make it less pleasant to me. I went there to be happy, not to be
miserable, and for three months I was happy indeed.

From there I went to my birthplace in Columbia County, revisiting old
scenes and the very few old friends and acquaintances who survived, or
who had not moved away. I spent a month there and thereabouts, and at
the end of that time I felt full restored to my usual good health, and
was ready to go to work again, not in the matrimonial way, but in my
medical business, that was enough for me now.



CHAPTER XIV. MY OWN SON TRIES TO MURDER ME.

SETTLING DOWN IN MAINE--HENRY'S HEALTH--TOUR THROUGH THE
SOUTH--SECESSION TIMES--DECEMBER IN NEW ORLEANS--UP THE
MISSISSIPPI--LEAVING HENRY IN MASSACHUSETTS--BACK IN MAINE AGAIN--RETURN
TO BOSTON--PROFITABLE HORSE TRADING--PLENTY OF MONEY--MY FIRST WIFE'S
CHILDREN--HOW THEY HAD BEEN BROUGHT UP--A BAREFACED ROBBERY--ATTEMPT TO
BLACKMAIL ME--MY SON TRIES TO ROB AND KILL ME--MY RESCUE--LAST OF THE
YOUNG MAN.



Where to go, not what to do, was the next question. Wherever I might go
and establish myself, if only for a few days, or a few weeks, I was sure
to have almost immediately plenty of patients and customers enough for
my medicines--this had been my experience always--and unfortunately for
me, I was almost equally sure to get into some difficulty from which
escape was not always easy. Looking over the whole ground for a fresh
start in business, it seemed to me that Maine was the most favorable
place. Whenever I had been there I had done well; it was one of the very
few States I had lived in where I had not been in jail or in prison; nor
had I been married there, though the Biddeford widow did her best to wed
me, and it is not her fault that she did not succeed in doing it.

To Maine, then, I went, settling down in Augusta, and remaining there
four months, during which time I had as much as I could possibly attend
to, and laid by a very considerable sum of money. While I was there
I heard the most unfavorable reports with regard to the health of my
eldest son Henry. Prison life at Trenton had broken him down in body
as well as in spirit, and he had been ill, some of the time seriously,
nearly all the time since he went to Unadilla. The fact that he was
entirely innocent of the offence for which he was imprisoned, preyed
upon his mind, and with the worst results. As these stories reached me
from week to week, I became anxious and even alarmed about him, and at
last I left my lucrative business in Augusta and went to New York. I
could not well go to Unadilla to visit Henry without seeing his mother,
whom I had no desire to see; so I sent for him to come to me in the
city if was able to do so. I knew that if medicine or medical attendance
would benefit him, I should be able to help him.

In a few days he came to me in a most deplorable physical condition. He
was a mere wreck of his former self. Almost immediately he began to talk
about the attempt to abduct the boy from Oxford; how innocent he was in
the matter, and how terribly he had suffered merely because he happened
to be with me when I rashly endeavored to kidnap the lad. All this went
through me like a sharp sword. It seemed as if I was the cause, not only
of great unhappiness to myself, but of pain and misery to all who were
associated or brought in contact with me. For this poor boy, who had
endured and suffered so much on my account, I could not do enough. My
means and time must now be devoted to his recovery, if recovery, was
possible.

He was weak, but was still able to walk about, and he enjoyed riding
very much. I kept him with me in the city a week or two, taking daily
rides to the Park and into the country, and when he felt like going out
in the evening I made him go to some place of amusement with me. I had
no other business, and meant to have none, but to take care of Henry,
and I devoted myself wholly to his comfort and happiness. In a few days
he had much improved in health and spirits, so much so, that I meditated
making a long tour with him to the South, hoping that the journey there
and back again would fully restore him.

Fortunately, my recent Maine business had put me in possession of
abundant funds, and when I had matured my scheme, and saw that Henry
was in tolerable condition to travel, I proposed the trip to him, and he
joyfully assented to my plan. I wanted to get him far away, for awhile,
from a part of the country which was associated in his mind, more than
in mine, with so much misery, and he seemed quite as eager to go. Change
of air and scene I knew would do wonders for him bodily, and would build
him up again.

We made our preparations and started for the South, going first to
Baltimore and then on through the Southern States by railroad to New
Orleans. It was late in the fall of 1860, just before the rebellion,
when the south was seceding or talking secession, and was already
preparing for war. Henry's physical condition compelled us to rest
frequently on the way, and we stopped sometimes for two or three days
at a time, at nearly every large town or city on the entire route.
Everywhere there was a great deal of excitement; meetings were held
nearly every night secession was at fever heat, and there was an
unbounded expression and manifestation of ill-feeling against the north
and against northern men. Nevertheless, I was never in any part of
the Union where I was treated with so much courtesy, consideration and
genuine kindness as I was there and then. I was going south, simply to
benefit the invalid who accompanied me; everybody seemed to know it;
and everybody expressed the tenderest sympathy for my son. Wherever we
stopped, it seemed as if the people at the hotels, from the landlord
to the lowest servant, could not do enough for us. At Atlanta, Augusta,
Mobile, and other places, where we made our stay long enough to get a
little acquainted, my son and myself were daily taken out to ride, and
were shown everything of interest that was to be seen. Henry did not
enjoy this journey more than I did--to me as well as to him, the trip
was one prolonged pleasure, and by the time we reached New Orleans
nearly a month after we left New York, my son had so recuperated that I
had every hope of his speedy and full restoration.

It was the beginnings of winter when we reached New Orleans; but during
the whole month of December while we remained in that city, winter,
if indeed it was winter, which we could hardly believe, was only a
prolongation of the last beautiful autumn days we had left at the north.
Now Orleans was then at the very height of prosperity; business
was brisk, money was plenty, the ships of all nations and countless
steamboats from St. Louis, Cincinnati, Louisville and all points up the
Mississippi and Ohio rivers lay at the levee. The levee itself, from
end to end, for miles along the river front, was one mass of merchandise
which had come to the city, or was awaiting shipment. I had never seen a
livelier city. Indescribably gay, too, was New Orleans that winter. The
city was full of strangers; the hotels were thronged; there were balls
every night; the theatres were crowded, and everybody seemed bent
on having a good time. With all the rest, there was an extraordinary
military furor, and militia companies and regiments paraded the streets
every day, while secession meetings were held in various halls, or in
the public squares, nearly ever night.

From the St. Charles hotel where we stopped, St. Charles street seemed
ablaze and alive all night, and densely thronged all day. Sunday brought
no rest, for Sunday, so far as military parades, amusement and general
gaiety were concerned, was the liveliest day in the week; and Sunday
night the theatres were sure to present their best performances and to
draw their largest audiences. And so, from morning till night, and
from night till morning again, all was whirl, stir, bustle, business,
enjoyment, and excitement. To me, unaccustomed as I was to such scenes,
New York even seemed tame and dull, and slow in comparison with New
Orleans.

This is a picture of the Crescent City as it presented itself to me and
to my son in the early part of the winter before the war. No one knew
or even dreamed of the terrible times that were to come. No one believed
that war was probable, or even possible; it was well enough, perhaps,
to prepare for it; but secession was to be an accomplished fact, and
the North and all the world would quietly acknowledge it. This was the
general sentiment in the city; though secession, and what would, or what
might come of it, was the general topic of talk in the hotels, in the
restaurants, at the theatres, in the streets, everywhere. Now and then
some southerner with whom I had become acquainted would try to draw me
out to ascertain my sentiments on the subject, but I always laughed, and
said good naturedly:

"My dear sir, I didn't come down here to talk about secession, but to
see if the southern climate would benefit my sick son."

The fact was that I minded my own business, and minded it so well that
while I was in New Orleans I managed to find a few patients and sold
recipes and medicines enough to pay the entire expenses of our journey
thus far, from the North.

Almost every day my son and I drove somewhere up to Carrolton, down to
the battle-ground, or on the shell road to Lake Ponchartrain. It was a
month of genuine enjoyment to us both; of profit to me pecuniarily; and
of the best possible benefit to Henry's health.

Early in January we took passage on one of the finest of the Mississippi
steamboats for St. Louis. The boat was crowded, and among the passengers
were a good many merchants, Northern men long resident in New Orleans,
who thought they saw trouble coming, and accordingly had closed up their
business in the Crescent City, and were now going North to stay there.
We had on board, too, the usual complement of gamblers and amateur or
professional poker-players, who kept the forward saloon near the bar,
and known in the river vernacular as the "Texas" of the boat, lively all
day long and well into the night, or rather the next morning. It was ten
or eleven days before we reached St. Louis. Nothing notable occurred
on the trip; but day after day, as we proceeded northward, and left
the soft, sunny south behind us, with the daily increasing coldness and
wintry weather, Henry seemed to decline by degrees, and gradually to
lose nearly all that he had gained since we left New York. When we
reached St. Louis he was seriously sick. I was very sorry we had come
away so soon in the season, and proposed that we should return and stay
in the south till spring; but Henry would not consent. There was nothing
to be done, then, but to hurry on to the east, and when we arrived in
New York Henry would not go home to his mother in Unadilla, but insisted
upon accompanying me to Boston. I was willing enough that he should go
with me, for then I could have him under my exclusive care; but when we
arrived in Boston he was so overcome by the excitement of travel, and
was so feeble from fatigue as well as disease, that instead of having
him go with me to Augusta, as I intended, by the advice of a friend I
took him into the country where he could be nursed, be quiet, and be
well taken care of till spring. I left him in good hands, promising
to come and see him as soon as I could, and then went back to my old
business in Augusta.

It required a little time to knot the new end of that business to the
end where I had broken off three months before; but I was soon in full
practice again and was once more making and saving money. I had no
matrimonial affair in hand, no temptation in fact, and none but strictly
professional engagements to fulfil. In Augusta and in several other
towns which I visited, for the whole of the rest of the winter, I was
as busy as I could be. Early in the spring I made up my mind to run away
for a week or two, and arranged my business so that I could go down into
Massachusetts and visit Henry, hoping, if he was better, to bring him
back with me to Maine.

Two of my patients in Paris, Maine, had each given me a good horse in
payment for my attendance upon them and their families, and for what
medicines I had furnished, and I took these horses with me to sell in
Boston. I drove them down, putting a good supply of medicines in my
wagon to sell in towns on the way, and when I arrived in Boston sold out
the establishment, getting one hundred and twenty-five dollars for the
wagon, three hundred dollars for one horse, and four hundred dollars
for the other--a pretty good profit on my time and medicine for the two
patients--and I brought with me besides about eighteen hundred dollars,
the net result, above my living expenses, of about three months'
business in Maine, and what I had done on the way down through
Massachusetts. I am thus minute about this money because it now devolves
upon me to show what sort of a family of children my first and worst
wife had brought up.

Of these children by my first marriage, my eldest son Henry, since he
had grown up, had been with me nearly as much as he had been with his
mother, and I loved him as I did my life. Since he became of age, at
such times when I was not in prison, or otherwise unavoidably separated
from him, we had been associated in business, and had traveled and lived
together. I knew all about him; but of the rest of the children I knew
next to nothing. Shortly after I sold my horses, one day I was in my
room at the hotel, when word was brought to me that some one in the
parlor wanted to see me.

I went down and found a young man, about twenty-one years of age, who
immediately came to me addressing me as "father," and he then presented
a young woman, about two years older than he was, as his sister and my
daughter. I had not seen this young gentleman since the time when I had
carried him off from school and from the farmer to whom he was bound,
and had clothed him and taken him with me to Amsterdam and Troy,
subsequently sending him to my half-sister at Sidney. The ragged little
lad, as I found him, had grown up into a stout, good-looking young man;
but I had no difficulty in recognizing him, though I was much at loss to
know the precise object of this visit; so after shaking hands with them,
and asking then how they were, I next inquired what they wanted?

Well, they had been to see Henry, and he was a great deal better.

I told them I was very glad to hear it, and that I was then on my way to
visit him, and hoped to see him in a few days, as soon as I could finish
my business in Boston; if Henry was as well as they reported I should
bring him away with me.

"But if you are busy here," said my young man, "we can save you both
time and trouble. We will go to Henry again and settle his bills for
board and other expenses, and will bring him with us to you at this
hotel."

Chan Laiwa, 69, is president of the Hong Kong-based Fu Wah International Group, a multinational company established in 1988 involved in real estate development, hotel business, tourism and electronics. Chan ranks as the third wealthiest woman in the world, with an estimated personal fortune of 27 billion yuan.

This, at the time, really seemed to me a kindly offer; it would enable
me to stay in Boston and attend to business I had to do, and Henry
would come there with his brother and sister in a day or two. I at once
assented to the plan, and taking my well-filled pocket-book from the
inside breast pocket of my coat, I counted out two hundred and fifty
dollars and gave them to the young man to pay Henry's board, doctor's
and other bills, and the necessary car fares for the party. They then
left me and started, as I supposed, to go after Henry.

But a few days went on and I saw and heard nothing of Henry. At last
word came to me one day that some one down stairs wanted to see me and I
told the servant to send him to my room, hoping that it might be Henry.
But no; it was my young man, of whom I instantly demanded:

"Where is your brother, whom you were to bring to me a week ago? What
have you done with the money I gave you for his bills?"

"I hadn't been near Henry; sister has gone home; and I've spent the
money on a spree, every cent of it, here in Boston, and I want more."

"Want more!" I exclaimed in blank amazement:

"Yes, more; and if you don't give it to me, I'll follow you wherever you
go, and tell people all I know about you."

"You scoundrel," said I, "you come here and rob, not me, but your poor,
sick brother, and then return and attempt to blackmail me. Get out of
my sight this instant."

He sprung on me, and made a desperate effort to get my money out of my
pocket. We had a terrible struggle. He was younger and stronger than
I was, and as I felt that I was growing weaker I called out loudly for
help and shouted "Murder!"

The landlord himself came running into the room; I succeeded in tearing
myself away, from the grasp of my assailant, and the landlord felled
him to the floor with a chair. He then ran to the door and called to a
servant to bring a policeman.

"No, don't!" I exclaimed; "Don't arrest the villain, for I can make no
complaint against him--he is my son!"

But the landlord was bound to have some satisfaction out of the affair;
so he dragged the young man into the hall and kicked him from the top of
the stairs to the bottom, where, as soon as he had picked himself up, a
convenient servant kicked him out into the street. I have never set eyes
on my young man since his somewhat sudden departure from that hotel.

And when I went to visit my poor Henry a day or two afterwards, I can
hardly say that I was surprised, though I was indignant to learn that
his brother and sister had never been near him at all since he had been
in Massachusetts. They knew where and how he was from his letter's to
his mother; they knew, too, from the same letters--for I had notified
Henry--at what time I would be in Boston, and with this information they
had come on to swindle me. I have no doubt, when the young man came the
second time to rob me, he would have murdered me, if the landlord had
not come to my assistance. And this was the youngest son of my first and
worst wife!!

I found Henry in better condition than I expected, and I took him back
with me to Augusta. I did not tell him of his brother's attempt to rob
and kill. Me--it would have been too great a shock for him. He stayed
with me only a few days and then, complaining of being homesick, he went
to visit his mother again.



CHAPTER XV. A TRUE WIFE AND HOME, AT LAST.

WHERE WERE ALL MY WIVES?--SENSE OF SECURITY--AN IMPRUDENT
ACQUAINTANCE--MOVING FROM MAINE--MY PROPERTY IN RENSSELAER COUNTY--HOW
I LIVED--SELLING A RECIPE--ABOUT BUYING A CARPET--NINETEEN
LAW--SUITS--SUDDEN DEPARTURE FOR THE WEST--A VAGABOND FOR TWO
YEARS--LIFE IN CALIFORNIA--RETURN TO THE EAST--DIVORCE FROM MY FIRST
WIFE--A GENUINE MARRIAGE--MY FARM--HOME AT LAST.



I remained in Maine nearly two years, hardly ever going out of the
State, except occasionally to Boston on business. Making Augusta my
residence and headquarters, I practiced in Portland and in nearly all
the towns and cities in the eastern part of the State. During all this
time, I behaved myself, in all respects better than I had ever before
done in any period of my life. I began to look upon myself as a reformed
man; I had learned to let liquor alone, and was consequently in far
less, indeed, next to no danger of stepping into the traps in which
my feet had been so often caught. I may as well confess it--it was
intoxicating liquor, and that mainly, which had led me into my various
mad marrying schemes and made me the matrimonial monomaniac and lunatic
lover that I was for years. What my folly, my insanity caused me to
suffer, these pages have attempted to portray. I had grown older, wiser,
and certainly better. I now only devoted myself strictly to my business,
and I found profit as well as pleasure in doing it.

What had become of all my wives in the meantime, I scarcely knew and
hardly cared. Of course from time to time I had heard more or less about
them--at least, a rumor of some sort now and then reached me. About my
first and worst wife, at intervals I heard something from Henry, who was
still with her, and who frequently wrote to me when he was well enough
to do so. Margaret Bradley and Eliza Gurnsey were still carrying on
the millinery business in Rutland, and in Montpelier, and were no
doubt weaving other and new webs in hopes of catching fresh flies. Mary
Gordon, as I learned soon afterwards, was married almost before I had
fairly escaped from New Hampshire in my flight to Canada, and she had
gone to California with her new husband. Of the Newark widow I knew
nothing; but two years of peace, quiet, and freedom from molestation
in Maine had made me feel quite secure against any present or future
trouble from my past matrimonial misadventures.

I was living in Maine, prudently I think under an assumed name, and as
the respectable, and, to my patients and customers, well-known Doctor
Blank, I was scarcely liable to be recognized at any time or by any
one as the man who had married so many wives, been in so many jails and
prisons, and whose exploits had been detailed from time to time in the
papers.

Nor, all this while, did I have the slightest fear of detection. I
looked upon myself as a victim rather than as a criminal, and for what
I had done, and much that I had not done, I had more than paid the
penalty. So far as all my business transactions were concerned, my
course had always been honorable, and in my profession, for my cures and
for my medicines, I enjoyed a good reputation which all my efforts were
directed to deserve.

Of course, now and then, I met people in Portland, and especially in
Boston, who had known me in former years, and who knew something of my
past life; but these were generally my friends who sympathized with my
sufferings, or who, at least, were willing to blot out the past in my
better behavior of the present. One day in Boston a young man came up to
me and said:

"How do you do, Doctor?"

"Quite well," I replied; "but you have the advantage of me; I am sure I
do not remember you, if I ever knew you."

"You don't remember me! Why, I am the son of the jailer in Montpelier
with whom you spent so many months before you went to Windsor; I knew
you in a minute, and Doctor, I've been in Boston a week and have got
'strapped;' how to get back to Montpelier I don't know, unless you will
lend me five or six dollars which I will send back to you the moment I
get home."

"I remember you well, now," said I; "you are the little rascal who
wouldn't even go and buy me a cigar unless I gave you a dime for doing
it; and then, sometimes, you cheated me out of my money; I wouldn't lend
you a dollar now if it would save you from six month's imprisonment in
your father's filthy jail. Good morning."

And that was the last I saw of him.

I was getting tired of Maine. I had been there longer than I had stayed
in any place, except in the Vermont State Prison, for the past fifteen
years, and I began to long for fresh scenes and a fresh field for
practice. I had accumulated some means, and thought I might take life
a little easier--make a home for myself somewhere, practicing my
profession when I wanted to, and at other times enjoying the leisure
I loved and really needed. So I closed up my business in Augusta and
Portland, put my money in my pocket, and once more went out into the
world on a prospecting tour. My first idea was to go to the far West,
and I went to Troy with the intention of staying there a few days,
and then bidding farewell to the East forever. The New England States
presented no attractions to me; I had exhausted Maine, or rather it had
exhausted me; New Hampshire, Vermont, and Massachusetts had too many
unpleasant associations, if indeed they were safe states for me, with my
record to live in, and Connecticut I knew very little about. Certainly I
had no intention of trying to settle in New Jersey or Pennsylvania. The
west was the place; anywhere in the west.

Here was I in Troy, revolving plans in my own mind for migrating to the
west, just as Mary Gordon and I had done in the very same hotel, only a
few years before; and in the course of a week I came to exactly the same
conclusion that Mary and I did--not to go. I heard of a small farm--it
was a very small one of only twelve acres--which could be bought in
Rensselaer County, not more than sixteen miles from Albany and Troy.
I went to see the place, liked it, and bought it for sixteen hundred
dollars. There was a small but good house and a barn on the place,
and altogether it was a cheap and desirable property. I got a good
housekeeper, hired a man, and began to carry on this little farm,
raising garden vegetables and fruit mainly, and sending them to market
in Albany and Troy. Generally I took my own stuff to market, and sold
medicines and recipes as well, and in Albany I had a first rate practice
which I went to that city to attend to once or twice a week. While
my man was selling vegetables and fruit--I remember I sold a hundred
dollars worth of cherries from my farm the first summer--in the market,
I was Doctor Blank receiving my patients at Stanwix Hall, or calling
upon them at their residences; and when the day's work was over, my man
and I rode home in the wagon which had brought us and the garden truck
early in the morning. On the whole, this kind of life was exceedingly
satisfactory, and I liked it.

I made frequent expeditions to Saratoga and to other places not far from
home to attend to cases to which I was called, and to sell medicines;
and considering that the main object I had in settling in Rensselaer
County was rest and more leisure than I had enjoyed for some years, I
had a great deal more to do than I desired. Nevertheless, I might
have continued to live on my little farm, raising vegetables, picking
cherries, and practicing medicine in the neighborhood, had not the fate,
which seemed to insist that I should every little while come before
a court of justice for something or other, followed me even here. A
certain hardware dealer in Albany, with whom I had become acquainted,
proposed to buy one of my recipes, and to go into an extensive
manufacture of the medicine. He had read and heard of the fortunes that
had been made in patent medicines, by those who understand the business,
and he thought he would see if he could not get rich in a year or less
in the same way.

After some solicitation I sold him the recipe for one thousand dollars,
receiving six hundred dollars down, and a promise of the balance when
the first returns from sales of the medicine came in. I also entered
into a contract to show the man how to make the medicine, and to give
him such advice and assistance in his new business as I could. My
hardware friend understood his legitimate business better than he did
that which he had undertaken, and although be learned how to manufacture
the medicine he did not know how to sell it; and after trying it a few
weeks, and doing next to nothing, he turned upon me as the author of his
misfortunes and sued me for damages.

Incidental to this, and only incidental, is the following: Shortly after
I purchased my property, as I was very fond of calling my little farm,
in Rensselaer County, I was in Albany one day when it occurred to
me that I wanted a carpet for my parlor. I went to the store of a
well-known carpet-dealer, and asked to be shown some of his goods.
While I was going through the establishment I came across a man who
was industriously sewing together the lengths of a cut carpet, and I
recognized in him one of my fellow convicts at Windsor. He, however, did
not know me, and I doubt if he could have been convinced of my identity
as the wretch who plied the broom in the halls of the prison. To him,
as he glanced at me, I was only a well-dressed gentleman whom the
proprietor was courteously showing through the establishment in the
hope of securing a good customer. It was this little circumstance, I
think--my chance meeting with my old fellow-prisoner, and my changed
circumstances and appearance which put me beyond recognition by
him--that prompted me to the somewhat brazen business that followed:

"I only came in to look to-day," I said to the carpet-dealer; "for the
precise sum of money in my pocket at present is eighteen pence, and no
more; but if you will cut me off forty yards of that piece of carpeting,
and trust me for it, I will pay your bill in a few days, as sure as I
live."

My frank statement with regard to my finances seemed to attract the
attention of the merchant who laughed and said:

"Well, who are you, anyhow? Where do you live?"

I told him that I was Doctor Blank; that I lived in Rensselaer county
on a small place of my own; I raised fruit and vegetables for market; I
cured cancers, dropsy, and other diseases when I could; sold medicines
readily almost where I would; and was in Albany once or twice a week.

"Measure and cut off the carpet," said he to the clerk who was following
us, "and put it in the Doctor's wagon"

The bill was about a hundred dollars, and I drove home with the carpet.
It was nearly six weeks afterwards when I went into the store again, and
greeted the proprietor. He had seen me but once before and had totally
forgotten me. I told him I was Doctor Blank, small farmer and large
medical practitioner of Rensselaer County.

"The devil you are! Why, you're the man that bought a carpet of me a few
weeks ago; I was wondering what had become of you."

"I'm the man, and I must tell you that the carpet doesn't look well;
but never mind--here's a hundred dollars, and I want you to receipt the
bill."

"Now," said I, when he returned the bill to me receipted, "the carpet
looks firstrate; I never saw a handsomer one in my life."

"Well, you are an odd chap, any how," said the carpet-dealer, laughing,
and shaking me by the hand. Almost from that moment we were more than
mere acquaintances, we were fast friends. In the course of the long
conversation that followed, I told him of my trouble with the hardware
man--how I had sold him the recipe; that he had failed, from ignorance
to conduct the business properly, and had sued me for damages.

"I know the man," said my new friend; "let him go ahead and sue and
be benefited, if he can; meanwhile, do you keep easy; I'll stand by
you."

And stand by me he did through thick and thin. The hardware man sued me
no less than nineteen times, and for pretty much everything--damages,
debt, breach of contract, and what not. With the assistance of a
lawyer whom my friend recommended to me, I beat my opponent in eighteen
successive suits; but as fast as one suit was decided he brought
another, almost before I could get out of the court room. At last he
carried the case to the Supreme Court, and from there it went to a
referee. The matter from beginning to end, must have cost him a mint
of money; but he went on regardless of the costs which he hoped and
expected to get out of me at last.

My long and painful experience, covering many years, had given me a
pretty thorough knowledge of the law's uncertainty, as well as the law's
delay, and very early in the course of the present suit, I had quietly
disposed of my property in Rensselaer County. I sold the little farm,
which cost me sixteen hundred dollars, for twenty-one hundred dollars,
and I had had, besides, the profits of nearly two years' farming and a
good living from and on the place. I also arranged all my money matters
in a manner that I felt assured would be satisfactory to me, if not
to my opponent, and then, following the advice of my friend, the
carpet-dealer, I let the hardware man sue and be "benefited if he
could." When, however, the case went finally to a referee who was
certain, I felt sure, to decide against me, I took no further personal
interest in the matter, nor have I ever troubled myself to learn the
filial decision. I made up my mind in a moment and decided that the time
had come, at last, when it was advisable for me to go to the West.

Westward I went, towards sunset almost, and for the two following years
I led, I fear, what would be considered a very vagabond life. I went
to Utah, thinking while I was in Salt Lake City, if they only knew my
history there I was sure to be elected an apostle, or should be, at any
rate, a shining light in Mormondom--only I had taken my wives in regular
succession, and had not assembled the throng together. I pushed across
the plains, and went to California, remaining a long time in San
Francisco. This may have been vagabondism, but it was profitable
vagabondism to me. During this long wandering I held no communication
with my friends in the East; friends and foes alike had an opportunity
to forget me, or if they thought of me they did not know whether I was
dead or alive; they certainly never knew, all the time, where I was;
and while I was journeying I never once met a man or woman who had
been acquainted with me in the past. All the time, too, I had plenty of
money; indeed, when, I returned at last I was richer far than I was when
I left Albany, and left as the common saying graphically expresses it,
"between two days." I had my old resources of recipes, medicines and my
profession, and these I used, and had plenty of opportunity to use, to
the best advantage. I could have settled in San Francisco for life
with the certainty of securing a handsome annual income. I never feared
coming to want. If I had lost my money and all other resources had
failed, I was not afraid to make a horse-nail or turn a horse-shoe
with the best blacksmith in California, and I could have got my living,
as I did for many a year, at the forge and anvil.

But I made more money in other and easier ways, and I made friends. In
every conceivable way my two years' wandering was of far more benefit to
me than I dreamed of when I wildly set out for the West without knowing
exactly where, or for what, I was going. The new country, too, had given
me, not only a fresh fund of ideas, but a new stock of health--morally
and physically I was in better condition than I ever was before in
my life. I had a clear head; a keen sense of my past follies; a vivid
consciousness of the consequences which such follies, crimes they may be
called, are almost certain to bring. I flattered myself that I was not
only a reformed prisoner, but a reformed drunkard, and a thoroughly
restored matrimonial monomaniac.

And when I returned, at last, to the East, and went once more to visit
my near and dear friends in Ontario County, I was received as one who
had come back from the dead. When I had been here a few weeks, and had
communicated to my cousins so much of the story of my life as I then
thought advisable, I took good counsel and finally did what I ought to
have done long years before. I commenced proper legal proceedings for
a divorce from my first and worst wife. I do not need to dwell upon the
particulars; it is enough to say, that the woman, who was then living,
so far from opposing me, aided me all she could, even making affidavit
to her adultery with the hotel clerk at Bainbridge, long ago, and I
easily secured my full and complete divorce. Now I was, indeed, a free
man--all the other wives whom I had married, or who had married me,
whether I would or no, were as nothing; some were dead and others were
again married. It may be that this new, and to me strange sense of
freedom, legitimate freedom, set me to thinking that I might now secure
a genuine and true wife, who would make a new home happy to me as long
as we both should live.

Fortune, not fate now, followed me, led me rather and guided my
footsteps. It was not many months before I met a woman who seemed to me
in every way calculated to fill the first place in that home which I had
pictured as a final rest after all my woes and wanderings. From mutual
esteem our acquaintance soon ripened into mutual love. She was all
that my heart could desire. I was tolerably well off; my position was
reputable; my connections were respectable. To us, and to our friends,
the match seemed a most desirable one. It was no hasty courtship; we
knew each other for months and learned to know each other well; and with
true love for each other, we had for each other a genuine respect. I
frankly told her the whole story of my life as I have now written it.
She only pitied my misfortunes, pardoned my errors, and, one bright,
golden, happy autumn day, we were married.

In the northeastern part of the State of New York on the banks of a
broad and beautiful river, spread out far and near the fertile acres
of one of the finest farms in the country. It is well stocked and well
tilled. The surrounding country is charming--game in the woods, and fish
in the streams afford abundant sport, and the region is far away from
large cities, and remote even from railroads. I do not know of a more
delightful place in the whole world to live in. On the farm I speak
of, a cottage roof covers a peaceful, happy family, where content and
comfort always seem to reign supreme. A noble woman, a most worthy wife
is mistress of that house; joyous children move and play among the trees
that shade the lawns; and the head of the household, the father of the
family, is the happiest of thee group.

That farm, that family, that cottage, that wife, that happy home are
mine--all mine. I have found a true wife and a real home at last.

My story is told; and if it should suggest to the reader the moral which
is too obvious to need rehearsal, one object I had in telling the story
will have been accomplished.

THE END.






End of Project Gutenberg's Seven Wives and Seven Prisons, by L.A. Abbott

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SEVEN WIVES AND SEVEN PRISONS ***

***** This file should be named 4667.txt or 4667.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/6/6/4667/

Produced by Charles Aldarondo

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

Project Gutenberg's Real Soldiers of Fortune, by Richard Harding Davis

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Real Soldiers of Fortune

Author: Richard Harding Davis

Posting Date: February 22, 2009 [EBook #3029]
Release Date: January, 2002

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REAL SOLDIERS OF FORTUNE ***




Produced by David Reed, and Ronald J. Wilson





REAL SOLDIERS OF FORTUNE


By Richard Harding Davis





MAJOR-GENERAL HENRY RONALD DOUGLAS MACIVER

ANY sunny afternoon, on Fifth Avenue, or at night in the _table d'hote_
restaurants of University Place, you may meet the soldier of fortune who
of all his brothers in arms now living is the most remarkable. You may
have noticed him; a stiffly erect, distinguished-looking man, with gray
hair, an imperial of the fashion of Louis Napoleon, fierce blue eyes,
and across his forehead a sabre cut.

This is Henry Ronald Douglas MacIver, for some time in India an ensign
in the Sepoy mutiny; in Italy, lieutenant under Garibaldi; in Spain,
captain under Don Carlos; in our Civil War, major in the Confederate
army; in Mexico, lieutenant-colonel under the Emperor Maximilian;
colonel under Napoleon III, inspector of cavalry for the Khedive of
Egypt, and chief of cavalry and general of brigade of the army of King
Milan of Servia. These are only a few of his military titles. In 1884
was published a book giving the story of his life up to that year. It
was called "Under Fourteen Flags." If to-day General MacIver were to
reprint the book, it would be called "Under Eighteen Flags."

MacIver was born on Christmas Day, 1841, at sea, a league off the shore
of Virginia. His mother was Miss Anna Douglas of that State; Ronald
MacIver, his father, was a Scot, a Rossshire gentleman, a younger son of
the chief of the Clan MacIver. Until he was ten years old young MacIver
played in Virginia at the home of his father. Then, in order that he
might be educated, he was shipped to Edinburgh to an uncle, General
Donald Graham. After five years his uncle obtained for him a commission
as ensign in the Honorable East India Company, and at sixteen, when
other boys are preparing for college, MacIver was in the Indian Mutiny,
fighting, not for a flag, nor a country, but as one fights a wild
animal, for his life. He was wounded in the arm, and, with a sword, cut
over the head. As a safeguard against the sun the boy had placed inside
his helmet a wet towel. This saved him to fight another day, but even
with that protection the sword sank through the helmet, the towel, and
into the skull. To-day you can see the scar. He was left in the road
for dead, and even after his wounds had healed, was six weeks in the
hospital.

This tough handling at the very start might have satisfied some men, but
in the very next war MacIver was a volunteer and wore the red shirt of
Garibaldi. He remained at the front throughout that campaign, and until
within a few years there has been no campaign of consequence in which he
has not taken part. He served in the Ten Years' War in Cuba, in
Brazil, in Argentina, in Crete, in Greece, twice in Spain in Carlist
revolutions, in Bosnia, and for four years in our Civil War under
Generals Jackson and Stuart around Richmond. In this great war he was
four times wounded.

It was after the surrender of the Confederate army, that, with other
Southern officers, he served under Maximilian in Mexico; in Egypt, and
in France. Whenever in any part of the world there was fighting, or the
rumor of fighting, the procedure of the general invariably was the
same. He would order himself to instantly depart for the front, and on
arriving there would offer to organize a foreign legion. The command of
this organization always was given to him. But the foreign legion was
merely the entering wedge. He would soon show that he was fitted for
a better command than a band of undisciplined volunteers, and would
receive a commission in the regular army. In almost every command in
which he served that is the manner in which promotion came. Sometimes he
saw but little fighting, sometimes he should have died several deaths,
each of a nature more unpleasant than the others. For in war the obvious
danger of a bullet is but a three hundred to one shot, while in the pack
against the combatant the jokers are innumerable. And in the career of
the general the unforeseen adventures are the most interesting. A man
who in eighteen campaigns has played his part would seem to have
earned exemption from any other risks, but often it was outside the
battle-field that MacIver encountered the greatest danger. He fought
several duels, in two of which he killed his adversary; several attempts
were made to assassinate him, and while on his way to Mexico he was
captured by hostile Indians. On returning from an expedition in Cuba he
was cast adrift in an open boat and for days was without food.

Long before I met General MacIver I had read his book and had heard of
him from many men who had met him in many different lands while
engaged in as many different undertakings. Several of the older war
correspondents knew him intimately; Bennett Burleigh of the _Telegraph_
was his friend, and E. F. Knight of the _Times_ was one of those who
volunteered for a filibustering expedition which MacIver organized
against New Guinea. The late Colonel Ochiltree of Texas told me tales
of MacIver's bravery, when as young men they were fellow officers in the
Southern army, and Stephen Bonsal had met him when MacIver was United
States Consul at Denia in Spain. When MacIver arrived at this post, the
ex-consul refused to vacate the Consulate, and MacIver wished to settle
the difficulty with duelling pistols. As Denia is a small place, the
inhabitants feared for their safety, and Bonsal, who was our _charge
d'affaires_ then, was sent from Madrid to adjust matters. Without
bloodshed he got rid of the ex-consul, and later MacIver so endeared
himself to the Denians that they begged the State Department to retain
him in that place for the remainder of his life.

Before General MacIver was appointed to a high position at the St. Louis
Fair, I saw much of him in New York. His room was in a side street in
an old-fashioned boarding-house, and overlooked his neighbor's back yard
and a typical New York City sumac tree; but when the general talked one
forgot he was within a block of the Elevated, and roamed over all
the world. On his bed he would spread out wonderful parchments, with
strange, heathenish inscriptions, with great seals, with faded ribbons.
These were signed by Sultans, Secretaries of War, Emperors, filibusters.
They were military commissions, titles of nobility, brevets for
decorations, instructions and commands from superior officers.
Translated the phrases ran: "Imposing special confidence in," "we
appoint," or "create," or "declare," or "In recognition of services
rendered to our person," or "country," or "cause," or "For bravery on
the field of battle we bestow the Cross----"

As must a soldier, the general travels "light," and all his worldly
possessions were crowded ready for mobilization into a small compass. He
had his sword, his field blanket, his trunk, and the tin despatch
boxes that held his papers. From these, like a conjurer, he would draw
souvenirs of all the world. From the embrace of faded letters, he would
unfold old photographs, daguerrotypes, and miniatures of fair women and
adventurous men: women who now are queens in exile, men who, lifted on
waves of absinthe, still, across a _cafe_ table, tell how they will win
back a crown.

Once in a written document the general did me the honor to appoint me
his literary executor, but as he is young, and as healthy as myself, it
never may be my lot to perform such an unwelcome duty. And to-day all
one can write of him is what the world can read in "Under Fourteen
Flags," and some of the "foot-notes to history" which I have copied
from his scrap-book. This scrap-book is a wonderful volume, but owing
to "political" and other reasons, for the present, of the many clippings
from newspapers it contains there are only a few I am at liberty to
print. And from them it is difficult to make a choice. To sketch in a
few thousand words a career that had developed under Eighteen Flags is
in its very wealth embarrassing.

Here is one story, as told by the scrap-book, of an expedition that
failed. That it failed was due to a British Cabinet Minister; for had
Lord Derby possessed the imagination of the Soldier of Fortune, his
Majesty's dominions might now be the richer by many thousands of square
miles and many thousands of black subjects.

On October 29, 1883, the following appeared in the London _Standard_:
"The New Guinea Exploration and Colonization Company is already
chartered, and the first expedition expects to leave before Christmas."
"The prospectus states settlers intending to join the first party must
contribute one hundred pounds toward the company. This subscription will
include all expenses for passage money. Six months' provisions will be
provided, together with tents and arms for protection. Each subscriber
of one hundred pounds is to obtain a certificate entitling him to one
thousand acres."

The view of the colonization scheme taken by the _Times_ of London, of
the same date, is less complaisant. "The latest commercial sensation is
a proposed company for the seizure of New Guinea. Certain adventurous
gentlemen are looking out for one hundred others who have money and
a taste for buccaneering. When the company has been completed, its
share-holders are to place themselves under military regulations, sail
in a body for New Guinea, and without asking anybody's leave, seize
upon the island and at once, in some unspecified way, proceed to realize
large profits. If the idea does not suggest comparisons with the large
designs of Sir Francis Drake, it is at least not unworthy of Captain
Kidd."

When we remember the manner in which some of the colonies of Great
Britain were acquired, the _Times_ seems almost squeamish.

In a Melbourne paper, June, 1884, is the following paragraph:

"Toward the latter part of 1883 the Government of Queensland planted the
flag of Great Britain on the shores of New Guinea. When the news reached
England it created a sensation. The Earl of Derby, Secretary for the
Colonies, refused, however, to sanction the annexation of New
Guinea, and in so doing acted contrary to the sincere wish of every
right-thinking Anglo-Saxon under the Southern Cross.

"While the subsequent correspondence between the Home and Queensland
governments was going on, Brigadier-General H. R. MacIver originated and
organized the New Guinea Exploration and Colonization Company in London,
with a view to establishing settlements on the island. The company,
presided over by General Beresford of the British Army, and having
an eminently representative and influential board of directors, had a
capital of two hundred and fifty thousand pounds, and placed the
supreme command of the expedition in the hands of General MacIver.
Notwithstanding the character of the gentlemen composing the board of
directors, and the truly peaceful nature of the expedition, his Lordship
informed General MacIver that in the event of the latter's attempting to
land on New Guinea, instructions would be sent to the officer in command
of her Majesty's fleet in the Western Pacific to fire upon the company's
vessel. This meant that the expedition would be dealt with as a
filibustering one."

In _Judy_, September 21, 1887, appears:

"We all recollect the treatment received by Brigadier-General MacI. in
the action he took with respect to the annexation of New Guinea. The
General, who is a sort of Pizarro, with a dash of D'Artagnan, was
treated in a most scurvy manner by Lord Derby. Had MacIver not been
thwarted in his enterprise, the whole of New Guinea would now have been
under the British flag, and we should not be cheek-by-jowl with the
Germans, as we are in too many places."

_Society_, September 3, 1887, says:

"The New Guinea expedition proved abortive, owing to the blundering
shortsightedness of the then Government, for which Lord Derby was
chiefly responsible, but what little foothold we possess in New Guinea,
is certainly due to General MacIver's gallant effort."

Copy of statement made by J. Rintoul Mitchell, June 2, 1887:

"About the latter end of the year 1883, when I was editor-in-chief of
the _Englishman_ in Calcutta, I was told by Captain de Deaux, assistant
secretary in the Foreign Office of the Indian Government, that he
had received a telegram from Lord Derby to the effect that if General
MacIver ventured to land upon the coast of New Guinea it would become
the duty of Lord Ripon, Viceroy, to use the naval forces at his command
for the purpose of deporting General MacI. Sir Aucland Calvin can
certify to this, as it was discussed in the Viceregal Council."

Just after our Civil War MacIver was interested in another expedition
which also failed. Its members called themselves the Knights of Arabia,
and their object was to colonize an island much nearer to our shores
than New Guinea. MacIver, saying that his oath prevented, would never
tell me which island this was, but the reader can choose from
among Cuba, Haiti, and the Hawaiian group. To have taken Cuba, the
"colonizers" would have had to fight not only Spain, but the Cubans
themselves, on whose side they were soon fighting in the Ten Years' War;
so Cuba may be eliminated. And as the expedition was to sail from the
Atlantic side, and not from San Francisco, the island would appear to be
the Black Republic. From the records of the times it would seem that the
greater number of the Knights of Arabia were veterans of the Confederate
army, and there is no question but that they intended to subjugate the
blacks of Haiti and form a republic for white men in which slavery would
be recognized. As one of the leaders of this filibustering expedition,
MacIver was arrested by General Phil Sheridan and for a short time cast
into jail.

This chafed the general's spirit, but he argued philosophically that
imprisonment for filibustering, while irksome, brought with it
no reproach. And, indeed, sometimes the only difference between a
filibuster and a government lies in the fact that the government fights
the gun-boats of only the enemy while a filibuster must dodge the boats
of the enemy and those of his own countrymen. When the United States
went to war with Spain there were many men in jail as filibusters, for
doing that which at the time the country secretly approved, and later
imitated. And because they attempted exactly the same thing for which
Dr. Jameson was imprisoned in Holloway Jail, two hundred thousand of his
countrymen are now wearing medals.

The by-laws of the Knights of Arabia leave but little doubt as to its
object.

By-law No. II reads:

"We, as Knights of Arabia, pledge ourselves to aid, comfort, and protect
all Knights of Arabia, especially those who are wounded in obtaining our
grand object.

"III--Great care must be taken that no unbeliever or outsider shall gain
any insight into the mysteries or secrets of the Order.

"IV--The candidate will have to pay one hundred dollars cash to
the Captain of the Company, and the candidate will receive from the
Secretary a Knight of Arabia bond for one hundred dollars in gold, with
ten per cent interest, payable ninety days after the recognition of (The
Republic of----) by the United States, or any government.

"V--All Knights of Arabia will be entitled to one hundred acres of
land, location of said land to be drawn for by lottery. The products are
coffee, sugar, tobacco, and cotton."

A local correspondent of the New York _Herald_ writes of the arrest of
MacIver as follows:

"When MacIver will be tried is at present unknown, as his case has
assumed a complicated aspect. He claims British protection as a subject
of her British Majesty, and the English Consul has forwarded a statement
of his case to Sir Frederick Bruce at Washington, accompanied by a copy
of the by-laws. General Sheridan also has forwarded a statement to
the Secretary of War, accompanied not only by the by-laws, but very
important documents, including letters from Jefferson Davis, Benjamin,
the Secretary of State of the Confederate States, and other personages
prominent in the Rebellion, showing that MacIver enjoyed the highest
confidence of the Confederacy."

As to the last statement, an open letter I found in his scrap-book is an
excellent proof. It is as follows: "To officers and members of all camps
of United Confederate Veterans: It affords me the greatest pleasure to
say that the bearer of this letter, General Henry Ronald MacIver, was an
officer of great gallantry in the Confederate Army, serving on the staff
at various times of General Stonewall Jackson, J. E. B. Stuart, and E.
Kirby Smith, and that his official record is one of which any man may be
proud.

"Respectfully, MARCUS J. WRIGHT, "_Agent for the Collection of
Confederate Records_.

"War Records office, War Department, Washington, July 8, 1895."

At the close of the war duels between officers of the two armies were
not infrequent. In the scrap-book there is the account of one of these
affairs sent from Vicksburg to a Northern paper by a correspondent who
was an eye-witness of the event. It tells how Major MacIver, accompanied
by Major Gillespie, met, just outside of Vicksburg, Captain Tomlin of
Vermont, of the United States Artillery Volunteers. The duel was with
swords. MacIver ran Tomlin through the body. The correspondent writes:

"The Confederate officer wiped his sword on his handkerchief. In a few
seconds Captain Tomlin expired. One of Major MacIver's seconds called to
him: 'He is dead; you must go. These gentlemen will look after the body
of their friend.' A negro boy brought up the horses, but before mounting
MacIver said to Captain Tomlin's seconds: 'My friends are in haste for
me to go. Is there anything I can do? I hope you consider that this
matter has been settled honorably?'

"There being no reply, the Confederates rode away."

In a newspaper of to-day so matter-of-fact an acceptance of an event so
tragic would make strange reading.

From the South MacIver crossed through Texas to join the Royalist army
under the Emperor Maximilian. It was while making his way, with other
Confederate officers, from Galveston to El Paso, that MacIver was
captured by the Indians. He was not ill-treated by them, but for three
months was a prisoner, until one night, the Indians having camped near
the Rio Grande, he escaped into Mexico. There he offered his sword to
the Royalist commander, General Mejia, who placed him on his staff, and
showed him some few skirmishes. At Monterey MacIver saw big fighting,
and for his share in it received the title of Count, and the order of
Guadaloupe. In June, contrary to all rules of civilized war, Maximilian
was executed and the empire was at an end. MacIver escaped to the coast,
and from Tampico took a sailing vessel to Rio de Janeiro. Two months
later he was wearing the uniform of another emperor, Dom Pedro, and,
with the rank of lieutenant-colonel, was in command of the Foreign
Legion of the armies of Brazil and Argentina, which at that time as
allies were fighting against Paraguay.

MacIver soon recruited seven hundred men, but only half of these ever
reached the front. In Buenos Ayres cholera broke out and thirty thousand
people died, among the number about half the Legion. MacIver was among
those who suffered, and before he recovered was six weeks in hospital.
During that period, under a junior officer, the Foreign Legion was sent
to the front, where it was disbanded.

On his return to Glasgow, MacIver foregathered with an old friend,
Bennett Burleigh, whom he had known when Burleigh was a lieutenant
in the navy of the Confederate States. Although today known as a
distinguished war correspondent, in those days Burleigh was something of
a soldier of fortune himself, and was organizing an expedition to assist
the Cretan insurgents against the Turks. Between the two men it was
arranged that MacIver should precede the expedition to Crete and
prepare for its arrival. The Cretans received him gladly, and from the
provisional government he received a commission in which he was given
"full power to make war on land and sea against the enemies of Crete,
and particularly against the Sultan of Turkey and the Turkish forces,
and to burn, destroy, or capture any vessel bearing the Turkish flag."

This permission to destroy the Turkish navy single-handed strikes one
as more than generous, for the Cretans had no navy, and before one could
begin the destruction of a Turkish gun-boat it was first necessary to
catch it and tie it to a wharf.

At the close of the Cretan insurrection MacIver crossed to Athens and
served against the brigands in Kisissia on the borders of Albania
and Thessaly as volunteer aide to Colonel Corroneus, who had been
commander-in-chief of the Cretans against the Turks. MacIver spent three
months potting at brigands, and for his services in the mountains was
recommended for the highest Greek decoration.

From Greece it was only a step to New York, and almost immediately
MacIver appears as one of the Goicouria-Christo expedition to Cuba,
of which Goicouria was commander-in-chief, and two famous American
officers, Brigadier-General Samuel C. Williams was a general and Colonel
Wright Schumburg was chief of staff.

In the scrap-book I find "General Order No. 11 of the Liberal Army of
the Republic of Cuba, issued at Cedar Keys, October 3, 1869." In it
Colonel MacIver is spoken of as in charge of officers not attached to
any organized corps of the division. And again:

"General Order No. V, Expeditionary Division, Republic of Cuba, on board
_Lilian_," announces that the place to which the expedition is bound has
been changed, and that General Wright Schumburg, who now is in command,
orders "all officers not otherwise commissioned to join Colonel
MacIver's 'Corps of Officers.'"

The _Lilian_ ran out of coal, and to obtain firewood put in at Cedar
Keys. For two weeks the patriots cut wood and drilled upon the beach,
when they were captured by a British gun-boat and taken to Nassau.
There they were set at liberty, but their arms, boat, and stores were
confiscated.

In a sailing vessel MacIver finally reached Cuba, and under Goicouria,
who had made a successful landing, saw some "help yourself" fighting.
Goicouria's force was finally scattered, and MacIver escaped from the
Spanish soldiery only by putting to sea in an open boat, in which he
endeavored to make Jamaica.

On the third day out he was picked up by a steamer and again landed at
Nassau, from which place he returned to New York.

At that time in this city there was a very interesting man named
Thaddeus P. Mott, who had been an officer in our army and later
had entered the service of Ismail Pasha. By the Khedive he had
been appointed a general of division and had received permission to
reorganize the Egyptian army.

His object in coming to New York was to engage officers for that
service. He came at an opportune moment. At that time the city was
filled with men who, in the Rebellion, on one side or the other, had
held command, and many of these, unfitted by four years of soldiering
for any other calling, readily accepted the commissions which Mott had
authority to offer. New York was not large enough to keep MacIver and
Mott long apart, and they soon came to an understanding. The agreement
drawn up between them is a curious document. It is written in a neat
hand on sheets of foolscap tied together like a Commencement-day
address, with blue ribbon. In it MacIver agrees to serve as colonel of
cavalry in the service of the Khedive. With a few legal phrases omitted,
the document reads as follows:

"Agreement entered into this 24th day of March, 1870, between the
Government of his Royal Highness and the Khedive of Egypt, represented
by General Thaddeus P. Mott of the first part, and H. R. H. MacIver of
New York City.

"The party of the second part, being desirous of entering into the
service of party of the first part, in the military capacity of a
colonel of cavalry, promises to serve and obey party of the first part
faithfully and truly in his military capacity during the space of five
years from this date; that the party of the second part waives all
claims of protection usually afforded to Americans by consular and
diplomatic agents of the United States, and expressly obligates himself
to be subject to the orders of the party of the first part, and to make,
wage, and vigorously prosecute war against any and all the enemies of
party of the first part; that the party of the second part will not
under any event be governed, controlled by, or submit to, any order,
law, mandate, or proclamation issued by the Government of the United
States of America, forbidding party of the second part to serve party
of the first part to make war according to any of the provisions herein
contained, _it being, however, distinctly understood_ that nothing
herein contained shall be construed as obligating party of the second
part to bear arms or wage war against the United States of America.

"Party of the first part promises to furnish party of the second part
with horses, rations, and pay him for his services the same salary now
paid to colonels of cavalry in United States army, and will furnish him
quarters suitable to his rank in army. Also promises, in the case of
illness caused by climate, that said party may resign his office and
shall receive his expenses to America and two months' pay; that he
receives one-fifth of his regular pay during his active service,
together with all expenses of every nature attending such enterprise."

It also stipulates as to what sums shall be paid his family or children
in case of his death.

To this MacIver signs this oath:

"In the presence of the ever-living God, I swear that I will in all
things honestly, faithfully, and truly keep, observe, and perform the
obligations and promises above enumerated, and endeavor to conform to
the wishes and desires of the Government of his Royal Highness, the
Khedive of Egypt, in all things connected with the furtherance of his
prosperity, and the maintenance of his throne."

On arriving at Cairo, MacIver was appointed inspector-general of
cavalry, and furnished with a uniform, of which this is a description:
"It consisted of a blue tunic with gold spangles, embroidered in gold
up the sleeves and front, neat-fitting red trousers, and high
patent-leather boots, while the inevitable fez completed the gay
costume."

The climate of Cairo did not agree with MacIver, and, in spite of
his "gay costume," after six months he left the Egyptian service. His
honorable discharge was signed by Stone Bey, who, in the favor of the
Khedive, had supplanted General Mott.

It is a curious fact that, in spite of his ill health, immediately after
leaving Cairo, MacIver was sufficiently recovered to at once plunge into
the Franco-Prussian War. At the battle of Orleans, while on the staff
of General Chanzy, he was wounded. In this war his rank was that of a
colonel of cavalry of the auxiliary army.

His next venture was in the Carlist uprising of 1873, when he formed a
Carlist League, and on several occasions acted as bearer of important
messages from the "King," as Don Carlos was called, to the sympathizers
with his cause in France and England.

MacIver was promised, if he carried out successfully a certain mission
upon which he was sent, and if Don Carlos became king, that he would be
made a marquis. As Don Carlos is still a pretender, MacIver is still a
general. Although in disposing of his sword MacIver never allowed his
personal predilections to weigh with him, he always treated himself to a
hearty dislike of the Turks, and we next find him fighting against them
in Herzegovina with the Montenegrins. And when the Servians declared
war against the same people, MacIver returned to London to organize a
cavalry brigade to fight with the Servian army.

Of this brigade and of the rapid rise of MacIver to highest rank and
honors in Servia, the scrap-book is most eloquent. The cavalry brigade
was to be called the Knights of the Red Cross.

In a letter to the editor of the _Hour_, the general himself speaks of
it in the following terms:

"It may be interesting to many of your readers to learn that a select
corps of gentlemen is at present in course of organization under
the above title with the mission of proceeding to the Levant to
take measures in case of emergency for the defense of the Christian
population, and more especially of British subjects who are to a great
extent unprovided with adequate means of protection from the religious
furies of the Mussulmans. The lives of Christian women and children are
in hourly peril from fanatical hordes. The Knights will be carefully
chosen and kept within strict military control, and will be under
command of a practical soldier with large experience of the Eastern
countries. Templars and all other crusaders are invited to give aid and
sympathy."

Apparently MacIver was not successful in enlisting many Knights, for
a war correspondent at the capital of Servia, waiting for the war to
begin, writes as follows:

"A Scotch soldier of fortune, Henry MacIver, a colonel by rank, has
arrived at Belgrade with a small contingent of military adventurers.
Five weeks ago I met him in Fleet Street, London, and had some talk
about his 'expedition.' He had received a commission from the Prince of
Servia to organize and command an independent cavalry brigade, and he
then was busily enrolling his volunteers into a body styled 'The Knights
of the Red Cross.' I am afraid some of his bold crusaders have earned
more distinction for their attacks on Fleet Street bars than they are
likely to earn on Servian battle-fields, but then I must not anticipate
history."

Another paper tells that at the end of the first week of his service as
a Servian officer, MacIver had enlisted ninety men, but that they were
scattered about the town, many without shelter and rations:

"He assembled his men on the Rialto, and in spite of official
expostulation, the men were marched up to the Minister's four
abreast--and they marched fairly well, making a good show. The War
Minister was taken by storm, and at once granted everything. It has
raised the English colonel's popularity with his men to fever heat."

This from the _Times_, London:

"Our Belgrade correspondent telegraphs last night:

"'There is here at present a gentleman named MacIver. He came from
England to offer himself and his sword to the Servians. The Servian
Minister of War gave him a colonel's commission. This morning I saw him
drilling about one hundred and fifty remarkably fine-looking fellows,
all clad in a good serviceable cavalry uniform, and he has horses."'

Later we find that:

"Colonel MacIver's Legion of Cavalry, organizing here, now numbers over
two hundred men."

And again:

"Prince Nica, a Roumanian cousin of the Princess Natalie of Servia, has
joined Colonel MacIver's cavalry corps."

Later, in the _Court Journal_, October 28, 1876, we read:

"Colonel MacIver, who a few years ago was very well known in military
circles in Dublin, now is making his mark with the Servian army. In
the war against the Turks, he commands about one thousand Russo-Servian
cavalry."

He was next to receive the following honors:

"Colonel MacIver has been appointed commander of the cavalry of the
Servian armies on the Morava and Timok, and has received the Cross of
the Takovo Order from General Tchemaieff for gallant conduct in the
field, and the gold medal for valor."

Later we learn from the _Daily News_:

"Mr. Lewis Farley, Secretary of the 'League in Aid of Christians of
Turkey,' has received the following letter, dated Belgrade, October 10,
1876:

"'DEAR SIR: In reference to the embroidered banner so kindly worked by
an English lady and forwarded by the League to Colonel MacIver, I have
great pleasure in conveying to you the following particulars. On Sunday
morning, the flag having been previously consecrated by the archbishop,
was conducted by a guard of honor to the palace, and Colonel MacIver,
in the presence of Prince Milan and a numerous suite, in the name and
on behalf of yourself and the fair donor, delivered it into the hands
of the Princess Natalie. The gallant Colonel wore upon this occasion his
full uniform as brigade commander and chief of cavalry of the Servian
army, and bore upon his breast the 'Gold Cross of Takovo' which he
received after the battles of the 28th and 30th of September, in
recognition of the heroism and bravery he displayed upon these eventful
days. The beauty of the decoration was enhanced by the circumstances
of its bestowal, for on the evening of the battle of the 30th, General
Tchernaieff approached Colonel MacIver, and, unclasping the cross from
his own breast, placed it upon that of the Colonel.

"'(Signed.) HUGH JACKSON,

"'_Member of Council of the League_."

In Servia and in the Servian army MacIver reached what as yet is the
highest point of his career, and of his life the happiest period.

He was _general de brigade_, which is not what we know as a brigade
general, but is one who commands a division, a major-general. He was a
great favorite both at the palace and with the people, the pay was good,
fighting plentiful, and Belgrade gay and amusing. Of all the places
he has visited and the countries he has served, it is of this Balkan
kingdom that the general seems to speak most fondly and with the
greatest feeling. Of Queen Natalie he was and is a most loyal and
chivalric admirer, and was ever ready, when he found any one who did
not as greatly respect the lady, to offer him the choice of swords or
pistols. Even for Milan he finds an extenuating word.

After Servia the general raised more foreign legions, planned further
expeditions; in Central America reorganized the small armies of the
small republics, served as United States Consul, and offered his sword
to President McKinley for use against Spain. But with Servia the most
active portion of the life of the general ceased, and the rest has been
a repetition of what went before. At present his time is divided between
New York and Virginia, where he has been offered an executive position
in the approaching Jamestown Exposition. Both North and South he has
many friends, many admirers. But his life is, and, from the nature of
his profession, must always be, a lonely one.

While other men remain planted in one spot, gathering about them a home,
sons and daughters, an income for old age, MacIver is a rolling stone,
a piece of floating sea-weed; as the present King of England called him
fondly, "that vagabond soldier."

To a man who has lived in the saddle and upon transports, "neighbor"
conveys nothing, and even "comrade" too often means one who is no longer
living.

With the exception of the United States, of which he now is a
naturalized citizen, the general has fought for nearly every country in
the world, but if any of those for which he lost his health and blood,
and for which he risked his life, remembers him, it makes no sign. And
the general is too proud to ask to be remembered. To-day there is no
more interesting figure than this man who in years is still young enough
to lead an army corps, and who, for forty years, has been selling his
sword and risking his life for presidents, pretenders, charlatans, and
emperors.

He finds some mighty changes: Cuba, which he fought to free, is free;
men of the South, with whom for four years he fought shoulder to
shoulder, are now wearing the blue; the empire of Mexico, for which he
fought, is a republic; the empire of France, for which he fought, is a
republic; the empire of Brazil, for which he fought is a republic; the
dynasty in Servia, to which he owes his greatest honors, has been wiped
out by murder. From none of the eighteen countries he has served has he
a pension, berth, or billet, and at sixty he finds himself at home in
every land, but with a home in none.

Still he has his sword, his blanket, and in the event of war, to obtain
a commission he has only to open his tin boxes and show the commissions
already won. Indeed, any day, in a new uniform, and under the Nineteenth
Flag, the general may again be winning fresh victories and honors.

And so, this brief sketch of him is left unfinished. We will mark
it--_To be continued_.




BARON JAMES HARDEN-HICKEY

THIS is an attempt to tell the story of Baron Harden-Hickey, the Man Who
Made Himself King, the man who was born after his time.

If the reader, knowing something of the strange career of Harden-Hickey,
wonders why one writes of him appreciatively rather than in amusement,
he is asked not to judge Harden-Hickey as one judges a contemporary.

Harden-Hickey, in our day, was as incongruous a figure as was the
American at the Court of King Arthur; he was as unhappily out of the
picture as would be Cyrano de Bergerac on the floor of the Board
of Trade. Judged, as at the time he was judged, by writers of comic
paragraphs, by presidents of railroads, by amateur "statesmen" at
Washington, Harden-Hickey was a joke. To the vacant mind of the village
idiot, Rip Van Winkle returning to Falling Water also was a joke. The
people of our day had not the time to understand Harden-Hickey; they
thought him a charlatan, half a dangerous adventurer and half a fool;
and Harden-Hickey certainly did not under stand them. His last words,
addressed to his wife, showed this. They were: "I would rather die a
gentleman than live a blackguard like your father."

As a matter of fact, his father-in-law, although living under the
disadvantage of being a Standard Oil magnate, neither was, nor is, a
blackguard, and his son-in-law had been treated by him generously
and with patience. But for the duellist and soldier of fortune it was
impossible to sympathize with a man who took no greater risk in life
than to ride on one of his own railroads, and of the views the two men
held of each other, that of John H. Flagler was probably the fairer and
the more kindly.

Harden-Hickey was one of the most picturesque, gallant, and pathetic
adventurers of our day; but Flagler also deserves our sympathy.

For an unimaginative and hard-working Standard Oil king to have a
D'Artagnan thrust upon him as a son-in-law must be trying.

James A. Harden-Hickey, James the First of Trinidad, Baron of the
Holy Roman Empire, was born on December 8, 1854. As to the date all
historians agree; as to where the important event took place they
differ. That he was born in France his friends are positive, but at the
time of his death in El Paso the San Francisco papers claimed him as a
native of California. All agree that his ancestors were Catholics and
Royalists who left Ireland with the Stuarts when they sought refuge in
France. The version which seems to be the most probable is that he was
born in San Francisco, where as one of the early settlers, his father,
E. C. Hickey, was well known, and that early in his life, in order to
educate him, the mother took him to Europe.

There he was educated at the Jesuit College at Namur, then at Leipsic,
and later entered the Military College of St. Cyr.

James the First was one of those boys who never had the misfortune to
grow up. To the moment of his death, in all he planned you can trace the
effects of his early teachings and environment; the influences of the
great Church that nursed him, and of the city of Paris, in which he
lived. Under the Second Empire, Paris was at her maddest, baddest, and
best. To-day under the republic, without a court, with a society kept in
funds by the self-expatriated wives and daughters of our business men,
she lacks the reasons for which Baron Haussmann bedecked her and made
her beautiful. The good Loubet, the worthy Fallieres, except that they
furnish the cartoonist with subjects for ridicule, do not add to the
gayety of Paris. But when Harden-Hickey was a boy, Paris was never so
carelessly gay, so brilliant, never so overcharged with life, color, and
adventure.

In those days "the Emperor sat in his box that night," and in the box
opposite sat Cora Pearl; veterans of the campaign of Italy, of Mexico,
from the desert fights of Algiers, sipped sugar and water in front of
Tortoni's, the Cafe Durand, the Cafe Riche; the sidewalks rang with
their sabres, the boulevards were filled with the colors of the gorgeous
uniforms; all night of each night the Place Vendome shone with the
carriage lamps of the visiting pashas from Egypt, of nabobs from
India, of _rastaquoueres_ from the sister empire of Brazil; the state
carriages, with the outriders and postilions in the green and gold of
the Empress, swept through the Champs Elysees, and at the Bal Bulier,
and at Mabile the students and "grisettes" introduced the cancan. The
men of those days were Hugo, Thiers, Dumas, Daudet, Alfred de Musset;
the magnificent blackguard, the Duc de Morny, and the great, simple
Canrobert, the captain of barricades, who became a marshal of France.

Over all was the mushroom Emperor, his anterooms crowded with the
titled charlatans of Europe, his court radiant with countesses created
overnight. And it was the Emperor, with his love of theatrical display,
of gorgeous ceremonies; with his restless reaching after military glory,
the weary, cynical adventurer, that the boy at St. Cyr took as his
model.

Royalist as was Harden-Hickey by birth and tradition, and Royalist as
he always remained, it was the court at the Tuileries that filled his
imagination. The Bourbons, whom he served, hoped some day for a court;
at the Tuileries there was a court, glittering before his physical eyes.
The Bourbons were pleasant old gentlemen, who later willingly supported
him, and for whom always he was equally willing to fight, either with
his sword or his pen. But to the last, in his mind, he carried pictures
of the Second Empire as he, as a boy, had known it.

Can you not imagine the future James the First, barelegged, in a
black-belted smock, halting with his nurse, or his priest, to gaze up in
awestruck delight at the great, red-breeched Zouaves lounging on guard
at the Tuileries?

"When I grow up," said little James to himself, not knowing that he
never would grow up, "I shall have Zouaves for _my_ palace guard."

And twenty years later, when he laid down the laws for his little
kingdom, you find that the officers of his court must wear the mustache,
"_a la_ Louis Napoleon," and that the Zouave uniform will be worn by the
Palace Guards.

In 1883, while he still was at the War College, his father died, and
when he graduated, which he did with honors, he found himself his own
master. His assets were a small income, a perfect knowledge of the
French language, and the reputation of being one of the most expert
swordsman in Paris. He chose not to enter the army, and instead became
a journalist, novelist, duellist, an _habitue_ of the Latin Quarter and
the boulevards.

As a novelist the titles of his books suggest their quality. Among
them are: "Un Amour Vendeen," "Lettres d'un Yankee," "Un Amour dans
le Monde," "Memoires d'un Gommeux," "Merveilleuses Aventures de
Nabuchodonosor, Nosebreaker."

Of the Catholic Church he wrote seriously, apparently with deep
conviction, with high enthusiasm. In her service as a defender of the
faith he issued essays, pamphlets, "broadsides." The opponents of the
Church in Paris he attacked relentlessly.

As a reward for his championship he received the title of baron.

In 1878, while only twenty-four, he married the Countess de Saint-Pery,
by whom he had two children, a boy and a girl, and three years later
he started _Triboulet_. It was this paper that made him famous to "all
Paris."

It was a Royalist sheet, subsidized by the Count de Chambord and
published in the interest of the Bourbons. Until 1888 Harden-Hickey was
its editor, and even by his enemies it must be said that he served his
employers with zeal. During the seven years in which the paper amused
Paris and annoyed the republican government, as its editor Harden-Hickey
was involved in forty-two lawsuits, for different editorial
indiscretions, fined three hundred thousand francs, and was a principal
in countless duels.

To his brother editors his standing interrogation was: "Would you prefer
to meet me upon the editorial page, or in the Bois de Boulogne?" Among
those who met him in the Bois were Aurelien Scholl, H. Lavenbryon, M.
Taine, M. de Cyon, Philippe Du Bois, Jean Moreas.

In 1888, either because, his patron the Count de Chambord having died,
there was no more money to pay the fines, or because the patience of
the government was exhausted, _Triboulet_ ceased to exist, and
Harden-Hickey, claiming the paper had been suppressed and he himself
exiled, crossed to London.

From there he embarked upon a voyage around the world, which lasted two
years, and in the course of which he discovered the island kingdom of
which he was to be the first and last king. Previous to his departure,
having been divorced from the Countess de Saint-Pery, he placed his boy
and girl in the care of a fellow-journalist and very dear friend, the
Count de la Boissiere, of whom later we shall hear more.

Harden-Hickey started around the world on the _Astoria_, a British
merchant vessel bound for India by way of Cape Horn, Captain Jackson
commanding.

When off the coast of Brazil the ship touched at the uninhabited island
of Trinidad. Historians of James the First say that it was through
stress of weather that the _Astoria_ was driven to seek refuge there,
but as, for six months of the year, to make a landing on the island is
almost impossible, and as at any time, under stress of weather, Trinidad
would be a place to avoid, it is more likely Jackson put in to replenish
his water-casks, or to obtain a supply of turtle meat.

Or it may have been that, having told Harden-Hickey of the derelict
island, the latter persuaded the captain to allow him to land and
explore it. Of this, at least, we are certain, a boat was sent ashore,
Harden-Hickey went ashore in it, and before he left the island, as a
piece of no man's land, belonging to no country, he claimed it in his
own name, and upon the beach raised a flag of his own design.

The island of Trinidad claimed by Harden-Hickey must not be confused
with the larger Trinidad belonging to Great Britain and lying off
Venezuela.

The English Trinidad is a smiling, peaceful spot of great tropical
beauty; it is one of the fairest places in the West Indies. At every
hour of the year the harbor of Port of Spain holds open its arms to
vessels of every draught. A governor in a pith helmet, a cricket club, a
bishop in gaiters, and a botanical garden go to make it a prosperous
and contented colony. But the little derelict Trinidad, in latitude
20 degrees 30 minutes south, and longitude 29 degrees 22 minutes west,
seven hundred miles from the coast of Brazil, is but a spot upon the
ocean. On most maps it is not even a spot. Except by birds, turtles, and
hideous land-crabs, it is uninhabited; and against the advances of man
its shores are fortified with cruel ridges of coral, jagged limestone
rocks, and a tremendous towering surf which, even in a dead calm, beats
many feet high against the coast.

In 1698 Dr. Halley visited the island, and says he found nothing living
but doves and land-crabs. "Saw many green turtles in sea, but by reason
of the great surf, could catch none."

After Halley's visit, in 1700 the island was settled by a few Portuguese
from Brazil. The ruins of their stone huts are still in evidence. But
Amaro Delano, who called in 1803, makes no mention of the Portuguese;
and when, in 1822, Commodore Owen visited Trinidad, he found nothing
living there save cormorants, petrels, gannets, man-of-war birds, and
"turtles weighing from five hundred to seven hundred pounds."

In 1889 E. F. Knight, who in the Japanese-Russian War represented the
London _Morning Post_, visited Trinidad in his yacht in search of buried
treasure.

Alexander Dalrymple, in his book entitled "Collection of Voages, chiefly
in the Southern Atlantick Ocean, 1775," tells how, in 1700, he "took
possession of the island in his Majesty's name as knowing it to be
granted by the King's letter patent, leaving a Union Jack flying."

So it appears that before Harden-Hickey seized the island it already had
been claimed by Great Britain, and later, on account of the Portuguese
settlement, by Brazil. The answer Harden-Hickey made to these claims
was that the English never settled in Trinidad, and that the Portuguese
abandoned it, and, therefore, their claims lapsed. In his "prospectus"
of his island, Harden-Hickey himself describes it thus:

"Trinidad is about five miles long and three miles wide. In spite of
its rugged and uninviting appearance, the inland plateaus are rich with
luxuriant vegetation.

"Prominent among this is a peculiar species of bean, which is not only
edible, but extremely palatable. The surrounding seas swarm with fish,
which as yet are wholly unsuspicious of the hook. Dolphins, rock-cod,
pigfish, and blackfish may be caught as quickly as they can be hauled
out. I look to the sea birds and the turtles to afford our principal
source of revenue. Trinidad is the breeding-place of almost the entire
feathery population of the South Atlantic Ocean. The exportation of
guano alone should make my little country prosperous. Turtles visit the
island to deposit eggs, and at certain seasons the beach is literally
alive with them. The only drawback to my projected kingdom is the fact
that it has no good harbor and can be approached only when the sea is
calm."

As a matter of fact sometimes months pass before it is possible to
effect a landing.

Another asset of the island held out by the prospectus was its great
store of buried treasure. Before Harden-Hickey seized the island, this
treasure had made it known. This is the legend. In 1821 a great store
of gold and silver plate plundered from Peruvian churches had been
concealed on the islands by pirates near Sugar Loaf Hill, on the shore
of what is known as the Southwest Bay. Much of this plate came from
the cathedral at Lima, having been carried from there during the war
of independence when the Spanish residents fled the country. In their
eagerness to escape they put to sea in any ship that offered, and these
unarmed and unseaworthy vessels fell an easy prey to pirates. One of
these pirates on his death-bed, in gratitude to his former captain, told
him the secret of the treasure. In 1892 this captain was still living,
in Newcastle, England, and although his story bears a family resemblance
to every other story of buried treasure, there were added to the tale of
the pirate some corroborative details. These, in twelve years, induced
five different expeditions to visit the island. The two most important
were that of E. F. Knight and one from the Tyne in the bark _Aurea_.

In his "Cruise of the _Alerte_," Knight gives a full description of the
island, and of his attempt to find the treasure. In this, a landslide
having covered the place where it was buried, he was unsuccessful.

But Knight's book is the only source of accurate information concerning
Trinidad, and in writing his prospectus it is evident that Harden-Hickey
was forced to borrow from it freely. Knight himself says that the most
minute and accurate description of Trinidad is to be found in the "Frank
Mildmay" of Captain Marryat. He found it so easy to identify each spot
mentioned in the novel that he believes the author of "Midshipman Easy"
himself touched there.

After seizing Trinidad, Harden-Hickey rounded the Cape and made north to
Japan, China, and India. In India he became interested in Buddhism, and
remained for over a year questioning the priests of that religion and
studying its tenets and history.

On his return to Paris, in 1890, he met Miss Annie Harper Flagler,
daughter of John H. Flagler. A year later, on St. Patrick's Day,
1891, at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church, Miss Flagler became the
Baroness Harden-Hickey. The Rev. John Hall married them.

For the next two years Harden-Hickey lived in New York, but so quietly
that, except that he lived quietly, it is difficult to find out anything
concerning him. The man who, a few years before, had delighted Paris
with his daily feuilletons, with his duels, with his forty-two lawsuits,
who had been the master of revels in the Latin Quarter, in New York
lived almost as a recluse, writing a book on Buddhism. While he was in
New York I was a reporter on the _Evening Sun_, but I cannot recall ever
having read his name in the newspapers of that day, and I heard of him
only twice; once as giving an exhibition of his water-colors at the
American Art Galleries, and again as the author of a book I found in a
store in Twenty-second Street, just east of Broadway, then the home of
the Truth Seeker Publishing Company.

It was a grewsome compilation and had just appeared in print. It was
called "Euthanasia, or the Ethics of Suicide." This book was an apology
or plea for self-destruction. In it the baron laid down those occasions
when he considered suicide pardonable, and when obligatory. To support
his arguments and to show that suicide was a noble act, he quoted Plato,
Cicero, Shakespeare, and even misquoted the Bible. He gave a list of
poisons, and the amount of each necessary to kill a human being. To show
how one can depart from life with the least pain, he illustrated the
text with most unpleasant pictures, drawn by himself.

The book showed how far Harden-Hickey had strayed from the teachings
of the Jesuit College at Namur, and of the Church that had made him
"noble."

All of these two years had not been spent only in New York.
Harden-Hickey made excursions to California, to Mexico, and to Texas,
and in each of these places bought cattle ranches and mines. The money
to pay for these investments came from his father-in-law. But not
directly. Whenever he wanted money he asked his wife, or De la
Boissiere, who was a friend also of Flagler, to obtain it for him.

His attitude toward his father-in-law is difficult to explain. It is not
apparent that Flagler ever did anything which could justly offend him;
indeed, he always seems to have spoken of his son-in-law with tolerance,
and often with awe, as one would speak of a clever, wayward child. But
Harden-Hickey chose to regard Flagler as his enemy, as a sordid man
of business who could not understand the feelings and aspirations of a
genius and a gentleman.

Before Harden-Hickey married, the misunderstanding between his wife's
father and himself began. Because he thought Harden-Hickey was marrying
his daughter for her money, Flagler opposed the union. Consequently,
Harden-Hickey married Miss Flagler without "settlements," and for the
first few years supported her without aid from her father. But his
wife had been accustomed to a manner of living beyond the means of the
soldier of fortune, and soon his income, and then even his capital, was
exhausted. From her mother the baroness inherited a fortune. This was
in the hands of her father as executor. When his own money was gone,
Harden-Hickey endeavored to have the money belonging to his wife placed
to her credit, or to his. To this, it is said, Flagler, on the ground
that Harden-Hickey was not a man of business, while he was, objected,
and urged that he was, and that if it remained in his hands the money
would be better invested and better expended. It was the refusal of
Flagler to intrust Harden-Hickey with the care of his wife's money that
caused the breach between them.

As I have said, you cannot judge Harden-Hickey as you would a
contemporary. With the people among whom he was thrown, his ideas were
entirely out of joint. He should have lived in the days of "The Three
Musketeers." People who looked upon him as working for his own hand
entirely misunderstood him. He was absolutely honest, and as absolutely
without a sense of humor. To him, to pay taxes, to pay grocers' bills,
to depend for protection upon a policeman, was intolerable. He lived
in a world of his own imagining. And one day, in order to make his
imaginings real, and to escape from his father-in-law's unromantic world
of Standard Oil and Florida hotels, in a proclamation to the powers
he announced himself as King James the First of the Principality of
Trinidad.

The proclamation failed to create a world crisis. Several of the powers
recognized his principality and his title; but, as a rule, people
laughed, wondered, and forgot. That the daughter of John Flagler was
to rule the new principality gave it a "news interest," and for a few
Sundays in the supplements she was hailed as the "American Queen."

When upon the subject of the new kingdom Flagler himself was
interviewed, he showed an open mind.

"My son-in-law is a very determined man," he said; "he will carry out
any scheme in which he is interested. Had he consulted me about this,
I would have been glad to have aided him with money or advice. My
son-in-law is an extremely well-read, refined, well-bred man. He does
not court publicity. While he was staying in my house he spent nearly
all the time in the library translating an Indian book on Buddhism. My
daughter has no ambition to be a queen or anything else than what she
is--an American girl. But my son-in-law means to carry on this Trinidad
scheme, and--he will."

From his father-in-law, at least, Harden-Hickey could not complain that
he had met with lack of sympathy.

The rest of America was amused; and after less than nine days,
indifferent. But Harden-Hickey, though unobtrusively, none the less
earnestly continued to play the part of king. His friend De la Boissiere
he appointed his Minister of Foreign Affairs, and established in a
Chancellery at 217 West Thirty-sixth Street, New York, and from there
was issued a sort of circular, or prospectus, written by the king, and
signed by "Le Grand Chancelier, Secretaire d'Etat pour les Affaires
Etrangeres, M. le Comte de la Boissiere."

The document, written in French, announced that the new state would
be governed by a military dictatorship, that the royal standard was a
yellow triangle on a red ground, and that the arms of the principality
were "d'Or chape de Gueules." It pointed out naively that those who
first settled on the island would be naturally the oldest inhabitants,
and hence would form the aristocracy. But only those who at home enjoyed
social position and some private fortune would be admitted into this
select circle.

For itself the state reserved a monopoly of the guano, of the turtles,
and of the buried treasure. And both to discover the treasure and to
encourage settlers to dig and so cultivate the soil, a percentage of the
treasure was promised to the one who found it.

Any one purchasing ten $200 bonds was entitled to a free passage to the
island, and after a year, should he so desire it, a return trip. The
hard work was to be performed by Chinese coolies, the aristocracy
existing beautifully, and, according to the prospectus, to enjoy _"vie
d'un genre tout nouveau, et la recherche de sensations nouvelles."_

To reward his subjects for prominence in literature, the arts, and the
sciences, his Majesty established an order of chivalry. The official
document creating this order reads:


"We, James, Prince of Trinidad, have resolved to commemorate our
accession to the throne of Trinidad by the institution of an Order of
Chivalry, destined to reward literature, industry, science, and the
human virtues, and by these presents have established and do institute,
with cross and crown, the Order of the Insignia of the Cross of
Trinidad, of which we and our heirs and successors shall be the
sovereigns.

"Given in our Chancellery the Eighth of the month of December, one
thousand eight hundred and ninety-three, and of our reign, the First
Year.

"JAMES."

There were four grades: Chevalier, Commander, Grand Officer, and Grand
Cross; and the name of each member of the order was inscribed in
"The Book of Gold." A pension of one thousand francs was given to a
Chevalier, of two thousand francs to a Commander, and of three thousand
francs to a Grand Officer. Those of the grade of Grand Cross were
content with a plaque of eight diamond-studded rays, with, in the
centre, set in red enamel, the arms of Trinidad. The ribbon was red and
yellow.

A rule of the order read: "The costume shall be identical with that of
the Chamberlains of the Court of Trinidad, save the buttons, which shall
bear the impress of the Crown of the Order."

For himself, King James commissioned a firm of jewelers to construct a
royal crown. In design it was similar to the one which surmounted the
cross of Trinidad. It is shown in the photograph of the insignia. Also,
the king issued a set of postage-stamps on which was a picture of
the island. They were of various colors and denominations, and among
stamp-collectors enjoyed a certain sale.

To-day, as I found when I tried to procure one to use in this book, they
are worth many times their face value.

For some time the affairs of the new kingdom progressed favorably. In
San Francisco, King James, in person, engaged four hundred coolies and
fitted out a schooner which he sent to Trinidad, where it made regular
trips between his principality and Brazil; an agent was established
on the island, and the construction of docks, wharves, and houses
was begun, while at the chancellery in West Thirty-sixth Street, the
Minister of Foreign Affairs was ready to furnish would-be settlers with
information.

And then, out of a smiling sky, a sudden and unexpected blow was struck
at the independence of the little kingdom. It was a blow from which it
never recovered.

In July of 1895, while constructing a cable to Brazil, Great Britain
found the Island of Trinidad lying in the direct line she wished to
follow, and, as a cable station, seized it. Objection to this was made
by Brazil, and at Bahia a mob with stones pelted the sign of the English
Consul-General.

By right of Halley's discovery, England claimed the island; as a
derelict from the main land, Brazil also claimed it. Between the rivals,
the world saw a chance for war, and the fact that the island really
belonged to our King James for a moment was forgotten.

But the Minister of Foreign Affairs was at his post. With promptitude
and vigor he acted. He addressed a circular note to all the powers of
Europe, and to our State Department a protest. It read as follows:


  "GRANDE CHANCELLERIE DE LA PRINCIPAUTE DE
  TRINIDAD,
  27 WEST THIRTY-SIXTH STREET,
  NEW YORK CITY, U. S. A.,

"NEW YORK, _July_ 30, 1895.

_"To His Excellency Mr. the Secretary of State of the Republic of the
United States of North America, Washington, D. C.:_

"EXCELLENCY.--I have the honor to recall to your memory:

"1. That in the course of the month of September, 1893, Baron
Harden-Hickey officially notified all the Powers of his taking
possession of the uninhabited island of Trinidad; and

"2. That in course of January, 1894, he renewed to all these Powers the
official notification of the said taking of possession, and informed
them at the same time that from that date the land would be known
as 'Principality of Trinidad'; that he took the title of 'Prince of
Trinidad,' and would reign under the name of James I.

"In consequence of these official notifications several Powers have
recognized the new Principality and its Prince, and at all events none
thought it necessary at that epoch to raise objections or formulate
opposition.

"The press of the entire world has, on the other hand, often acquainted
readers with these facts, thus giving to them all possible publicity. In
consequence of the accomplishment of these various formalities, and
as the law of nations prescribes that 'derelict' territories belong to
whoever will take possession of them, and as the island of Trinidad,
which has been abandoned for years, certainly belongs to the aforesaid
category, his Serene Highness Prince James I was authorized to regard
his rights on the said island as perfectly valid and indisputable.

"Nevertheless, your Excellency knows that recently, in spite of all
the legitimate rights of my august sovereign, an English war-ship
has disembarked at Trinidad a detachment of armed troops and taken
possession of the island in the name of England.

"Following this assumption of territory, the Brazilian Government,
invoking a right of ancient Portuguese occupation (long ago outlawed),
has notified the English Government to surrender the island to Brazil.

"I beg of your Excellency to ask of the Government of the United
States of North America to recognize the Principality of Trinidad as
an independent State, and to come to an understanding with the other
American Powers in order to guarantee its neutrality.

"Thus the Government of the United States of North America will once
more accord its powerful assistance to the cause of right and of
justice, misunderstood by England and Brazil, put an end to a situation
which threatens to disturb the peace, re-establish concord between two
great States ready to appeal to arms, and affirm itself, moreover, as
the faithful interpreter of the Monroe Doctrine.

"In the expectation of your reply please accept, Excellency, the
expression of my elevated consideration.

"The Grand Chancellor, Secretary for Foreign Affairs,

"COMTE DE LA BOISSIERE."

At that time Richard Olney was Secretary of State, and in his treatment
of the protest, and of the gentleman who wrote it, he fully upheld the
reputation he made while in office of lack of good manners. Saying he
was unable to read the handwriting in which the protest was written,
he disposed of it in a way that would suggest itself naturally to a
statesman and a gentleman. As a "crank" letter he turned it over to the
Washington correspondents. You can imagine what they did with it.

The day following the reporters in New York swept down upon the
chancellery and upon the Minister of Foreign Affairs. It was the "silly
season" in August, there was no real news in town, and the troubles of
De la Boissiere were allowed much space.

They laughed at him and at his king, at his chancellery, at his broken
English, at his "grave and courtly manners," even at his clothes. But in
spite of the ridicule, between the lines you could read that to the man
himself it all was terribly real.

I had first heard of the island of Trinidad from two men I knew
who spent three months on it searching for the treasure, and when
Harden-Hickey proclaimed himself lord of the island, through the papers
I had carefully followed his fortunes. So, partly out of curiosity and
partly out of sympathy, I called at the chancellery.

I found it in a brownstone house, in a dirty neighborhood just west of
Seventh Avenue, and of where now stands the York Hotel. Three weeks ago
I revisited it and found it unchanged. At the time of my first visit,
on the jamb of the front door was pasted a piece of paper on which
was written in the handwriting of De la Boissiere: "Chancellerie de la
Principaute de Trinidad."

The chancellery was not exactly in its proper setting. On its door-step
children of the tenements were playing dolls with clothes-pins; in the
street a huckster in raucous tones was offering wilted cabbages to women
in wrappers leaning from the fire escapes; the smells and the heat of
New York in midsummer rose from the asphalt. It was a far cry to the
wave-swept island off the coast of Brazil.

De la Boissiere received me with distrust. The morning papers had made
him man-shy; but, after a few "Your Excellencies" and a respectful
inquiry regarding "His Royal Highness," his confidence revived. In the
situation he saw nothing humorous, not even in an announcement on the
wall which read: "Sailings to Trinidad." Of these there were _two_; on
March 1, and on October 1. On the table were many copies of the
royal proclamation, the postage-stamps of the new government, the
thousand-franc bonds, and, in pasteboard boxes, the gold and red
enamelled crosses of the Order of Trinidad.

He talked to me frankly and fondly of Prince James. Indeed, I never
met any man who knew Harden-Hickey well who did not speak of him with
aggressive loyalty. If at his eccentricities they smiled, it was with
the smile of affection. It was easy to see De la Boissiere regarded him
not only with the affection of a friend, but with the devotion of a
true subject. In his manner he himself was courteous, gentle, and so
distinguished that I felt as though I were enjoying, on intimate terms,
an audience with one of the prime-ministers of Europe.

And he, on his part, after the ridicule of the morning papers, to have
any one with outward seriousness accept his high office and his king,
was, I believe, not ungrateful.

I told him I wished to visit Trinidad, and in that I was quite serious.
The story of an island filled with buried treasure, and governed by a
king, whose native subjects were turtles and seagulls, promised to make
interesting writing.

The count was greatly pleased. I believe in me he saw his first
bona-fide settler, and when I rose to go he even lifted one of
the crosses of Trinidad and, before my envious eyes, regarded it
uncertainly.

Perhaps, had he known that of all decorations it was the one I
most desired; had I only then and there booked my passage, or sworn
allegiance to King James, who knows but that to-day I might be a
chevalier, with my name in the "Book of Gold"? But instead of bending
the knee, I reached for my hat; the count replaced the cross in its
pasteboard box, and for me the psychological moment had passed.

Others, more deserving of the honor, were more fortunate. Among my
fellow-reporters who, like myself, came to scoff, and remained to pray,
was Henri Pene du Bois, for some time, until his recent death, the
brilliant critic of art and music of the _American_. Then he was on
the _Times_, and Henry N. Cary, now of the _Morning Telegraph_, was his
managing editor.

When Du Bois reported to Cary on his assignment, he said: "There is
nothing funny in that story. It's pathetic. Both those men are in
earnest. They are convinced they are being robbed of their rights. Their
only fault is that they have imagination, and that the rest of us lack
it. That's the way it struck me, and that's the way the story ought to
be written."

"Write it that way," said Cary.

So, of all the New York papers, the _Times_, for a brief period, became
the official organ of the Government of James the First, and in time
Cary and Du Bois were created Chevaliers of the Order of Trinidad, and
entitled to wear uniforms "Similar to those of the Chamberlains of the
Court, save that the buttons bear the impress of the Royal Crown."

The attack made by Great Britain and Brazil upon the independence of the
principality, while it left Harden-Hickey in the position of a king in
exile, brought him at once another crown, which, by those who offered
it to him, was described as of incomparably greater value than that of
Trinidad.

In the first instance the man had sought the throne; in this case the
throne sought the man.

In 1893 in San Francisco, Ralston J. Markowe, a lawyer and a one-time
officer of artillery in the United States army, gained renown as one
of the Morrow filibustering expedition which attempted to overthrow the
Dole government in the Hawaiian Isles and restore to the throne Queen
Liliuokalani. In San Francisco Markowe was nicknamed the "Prince of
Honolulu," as it was understood, should Liliuokalani regain her
crown, he would be rewarded with some high office. But in the star
of Liliuokalani, Markowe apparently lost faith, and thought he saw
in Harden-Hickey timber more suitable for king-making. Accordingly,
twenty-four days after the "protest" was sent to our State Department,
Markowe switched his allegiance to Harden-Hickey, and to him addressed
the following letter:

"SAN FRANCISCO, August 26, 1895.

BARON HARDEN-HICKEY, LOS ANGELES, CAL.:

"Monseigneur--Your favor of August 16 has been received.

"1. I am the duly authorized agent of the Royalist party in so far as
it is possible for any one to occupy that position under existing
circumstances. With the Queen in prison and absolutely cut off from
all communication with her friends, it is out of the question for me to
carry anything like formal credentials.

"2. Alienating any part of the territory cannot give rise to any
constitutional questions, for the reason that the constitutions, like
the land tenures, are in a state of such utter confusion that only a
strong hand can unravel them, and the restoration will result in the
establishment of a strong military government. If I go down with the
expedition I have organized I shall be in full control of the situation
and in a position to carry out all my contracts.

"3. It is the island of Kauai on which I propose to establish you as an
independent sovereign.

"4. My plan is to successively occupy all the islands, leaving the
capital to the last. When the others have fallen, the capital, being cut
off from all its resources, will be easily taken, and may very likely
fall without effort. I don't expect in any case to have to fortify
myself or to take the defensive, or to have to issue a call to arms, as
I shall have an overwhelming force to join me at once, in addition to
those who go with me, who by themselves will be sufficient to carry
everything before them without active cooperation from the people there.

"5. The Government forces consist of about 160 men and boys, with very
imperfect military training, and of whom about forty are officers. They
are organized as infantry. There are also about 600 citizens enrolled
as a reserve guard, who may be called upon in case of an emergency,
and about 150 police. We can fully rely upon the assistance of all the
police and from one-quarter to one-half of the other troops. And of the
remainder many will under no circumstances engage in a sharp fight in
defense of the present government. There are now on the island plenty
of men and arms to accomplish our purpose, and if my expedition does
not get off very soon the people there will be organized to do the work
without other assistance from here than the direction of a few leaders,
of which they stand more in need than anything else.

"6. The tonnage of the vessel is 146. She at present has berth-room for
twenty men, but bunks can be arranged in the hold for 256 more, with
provision for ample ventilation. She has one complete set of sails and
two extra spars. The remaining information in regard to her I will have
to obtain and send you to-morrow. I think it must be clear to you that
the opportunity now offered you will be of incomparably greater value
at once than Trinidad would ever be. Still hoping that I may have an
interview with you at an early date, respectfully yours,

"RALSTON J. MARKOWE."

What Harden-Hickey thought of this is not known, but as two weeks before
he received it he had written Markowe, asking him by what authority he
represented the Royalists of Honolulu, it seems evident that when the
crown of Hawaii was first proffered him he did not at once spurn it.

He now was in the peculiar position of being a deposed king of an island
in the South Atlantic, which had been taken from him, and king-elect of
an island in the Pacific, which was his if he could take it.

This was in August of 1895. For the two years following, Harden-Hickey
was a soldier of misfortunes. Having lost his island kingdom, he could
no longer occupy himself with plans for its improvement. It had been
his toy. They had taken it from him, and the loss and the ridicule which
followed hurt him bitterly.

And for the lands he really owned in Mexico and California, and which,
if he were to live in comfort, it was necessary he should sell, he
could find no purchaser; and, moreover, having quarrelled with his
father-in-law, he had cut off his former supply of money. The need of it
pinched him cruelly.

The advertised cause of this quarrel was sufficiently characteristic
to be the real one. Moved by the attack of Great Britain upon his
principality, Harden-Hickey decided upon reprisals. It must be
remembered that always he was more Irish than French. On paper
he organized an invasion of England from Ireland, the home of his
ancestors. It was because Flagler refused to give him money for this
adventure that he broke with him. His friends say this was the real
reason of the quarrel, which was a quarrel on the side of Harden-Hickey
alone.

And there were other, more intimate troubles. While not separated from
his wife, he now was seldom in her company. When the Baroness was in
Paris, Harden-Hickey was in San Francisco; when she returned to San
Francisco, he was in Mexico. The fault seems to have been his. He was
greatly admired by pretty women. His daughter by his first wife, now a
very beautiful girl of sixteen, spent much time with her stepmother;
and when not on his father's ranch in Mexico, his son also, for months
together, was at her side. The husband approved of this, but he himself
saw his wife infrequently. Nevertheless, early in the spring of 1898,
the Baroness leased a house in Brockton Square, in Riverside, Cal.,
where it was understood by herself and by her friends her husband would
join her. At that time in Mexico he was trying to dispose of a large
tract of land. Had he been able to sell it, the money for a time would
have kept one even of his extravagances contentedly rich. At least,
he would have been independent of his wife and of her father. Up to
February of 1898 his obtaining this money seemed probable.

Early in that month the last prospective purchaser decided not to buy.

There is no doubt that had Harden-Hickey then turned to his
father-in-law, that gentleman, as he had done before, would have opened
an account for him.

But the Prince of Trinidad felt he could no longer beg, even for the
money belonging to his wife, from the man he had insulted. He could no
longer ask his wife to intercede for him. He was without money of his
own, with out the means of obtaining it; from his wife he had ceased to
expect even sympathy, and from the world he knew, the fact that he was
a self-made king caused him always to be pointed out with ridicule as a
charlatan, as a jest.

The soldier of varying fortunes, the duellist and dreamer, the devout
Catholic and devout Buddhist, saw the forty-third year of his life only
as the meeting-place of many fiascos.

His mind was tormented with imaginary wrongs, imaginary slights,
imaginary failures.

This young man, who could paint pictures, write books, organize colonies
oversea, and with a sword pick the buttons from a waistcoat, forgot the
twenty good years still before him; forgot that men loved him for the
mistakes he had made; that in parts of the great city of Paris his name
was still spoken fondly, still was famous and familiar.

In his book on the "Ethics of Suicide," for certain hard places in life
he had laid down an inevitable rule of conduct.

As he saw it he had come to one of those hard places, and he would not
ask of others what he himself would not perform.

From Mexico he set out for California, but not to the house his wife had
prepared for him.

Instead, on February 9, 1898, at El Paso, he left the train and
registered at a hotel.

At 7.30 in the evening he went to his room, and when, on the following
morning, they kicked in the door, they found him stretched rigidly upon
the bed, like one lying in state, with, near his hand, a half-emptied
bottle of poison.

On a chair was pinned this letter to his wife:

"My DEAREST,--No news from you, although you have had plenty of time to
write. Harvey has written me that he has no one in view at present to
buy my land. Well, I shall have tasted the cup of bitterness to the very
dregs, but I do not complain. Good-by. I forgive you your conduct toward
me and trust you will be able to forgive yourself. I prefer to be a dead
gentleman to a living blackguard like your father."


And when they searched his open trunk for something that might identify
the body on the bed, they found the crown of Trinidad.

You can imagine it: the mean hotel bedroom, the military figure with
its white face and mustache, "_a la_ Louis Napoleon," at rest upon the
pillow, the startled drummers and chambermaids peering in from the hall,
and the landlord, or coroner, or doctor, with a bewildered countenance,
lifting to view the royal crown of gilt and velvet.

The other actors in this, as Harold Frederic called it, "Opera Bouffe
Monarchy," are still living.

The Baroness Harden-Hickey makes her home in this country.

The Count de la Boissiere, ex-Minister of Foreign Affairs, is still a
leader of the French colony in New York, and a prosperous commission
merchant with a suite of offices on Fifty-fourth Street. By the will of
Harden-Hickey he is executor of his estate, guardian of his children,
and what, for the purpose of this article, is of more importance, in
his hands lies the future of the kingdom of Trinidad. When Harden-Hickey
killed himself the title to the island was in dispute. Should young
Harden-Hickey wish to claim it, it still would be in dispute. Meanwhile,
by the will of the First James, De la Boissiere is appointed perpetual
regent, a sort of "receiver," and executor of the principality.

To him has been left a royal decree signed and sealed, but blank. In the
will the power to fill in this blank with a statement showing the final
disposition of the island has been bestowed upon De la Boissiere.

So, some day, he may proclaim the accession of a new king, and give a
new lease of life to the kingdom of which Harden-Hickey dreamed.

But unless his son, or wife, or daughter should assert his or her
rights, which is not likely to happen, so ends the dynasty of James the
First of Trinidad, Baron of the Holy Roman Empire.

To the wise ones in America he was a fool, and they laughed at him; to
the wiser ones, he was a clever rascal who had evolved a new real-estate
scheme and was out to rob the people--and they respected him. To my
mind, of them all, Harden-Hickey was the wisest.

Granted one could be serious, what could be more delightful than to be
your own king on your own island?

The comic paragraphers, the business men of "hard, common sense," the
captains of industry who laughed at him and his national resources
of buried treasure, turtles' eggs, and guano, with his body-guard of
Zouaves and his Grand Cross of Trinidad, certainly possessed many things
that Harden-Hickey lacked. But they in turn lacked the things that made
him happy; the power to "make believe," the love of romance, the touch
of adventure that plucked him by the sleeve.

When, as boys, we used to say: "Let's pretend we're pirates," as a man,
Harden-Hickey begged: "Let's pretend I'm a king."

But the trouble was, the other boys had grown up and would not pretend.

For some reason his end always reminds me of the closing line of
Pinero's play, when the adventuress, Mrs. Tanqueray, kills herself, and
her virtuous stepchild says: "If we had only been kinder!"




WINSTON SPENCER CHURCHILL

IN the strict sense of the phrase, a soldier of fortune is a man who for
pay, or for the love of adventure, fights under the flag of any country.

In the bigger sense he is the kind of man who in any walk of life makes
his own fortune, who, when he sees it coming, leaps to meet it, and
turns it to his advantage.

Than Winston Spencer Churchill to-day there are few young men--and he is
a very young man--who have met more varying fortunes, and none who has
more frequently bent them to his own advancement. To him it has been
indifferent whether, at the moment, the fortune seemed good or evil, in
the end always it was good.

As a boy officer, when other subalterns were playing polo, and at the
Gaiety Theatre attending night school, he ran away to Cuba and fought
with the Spaniards. For such a breach of military discipline, any other
officer would have been court-martialled. Even his friends feared that
by his foolishness his career in the army was at an end. Instead, his
escapade was made a question in the House of Commons, and the fact
brought him such publicity that the _Daily Graphic_ paid him handsomely
to write on the Cuban Revolution, and the Spanish Government rewarded
him with the Order of Military Merit.

At the very outbreak of the Boer war he was taken prisoner. It seemed
a climax of misfortune. With his brother officers he had hoped in that
campaign to acquit himself with credit, and that he should lie inactive
in Pretoria appeared a terrible calamity. To the others who, through
many heart-breaking months, suffered imprisonment, it continued to be
a calamity. But within six weeks of his capture Churchill escaped, and,
after many adventures, rejoined his own army to find that the calamity
had made him a hero.

When after the battle of Omdurman, in his book on "The River War," he
attacked Lord Kitchener, those who did not like him, and they were many,
said: "That's the end of Winston in the army. He'll never get another
chance to criticise K. of K."

But only two years later the chance came, when, no longer a subaltern,
but as a member of the House of Commons, he patronized Kitchener by
defending him from the attacks of others.

Later, when his assaults upon the leaders of his own party closed to
him, even in his own constituency, the Conservative debating clubs,
again his ill-wishers said: "This _is_ the end. He has ridiculed those
who sit in high places. He has offended his cousin and patron, the Duke
of Marlborough. Without political friends, without the influence and
money of the Marlborough family he is a political nonentity." That was
eighteen months ago. To-day, at the age of thirty-two, he is one of the
leaders of the Government party, Under-Secretary for the Colonies, and
with the Liberals the most popular young man in public life.

Only last Christmas, at a banquet, Sir Edward Grey, the new Foreign
Secretary, said of him: "Mr. Winston Churchill has achieved distinction
in at least five different careers--as a soldier, a war correspondent,
a lecturer, an author, and last, but not least, as a politician. I
have understated it even now, for he has achieved two careers as a
politician--one on each side of the House. His first career on the
Government side was a really distinguished career. I trust the second
will be even more distinguished--and more prolonged. The remarkable
thing is that he has done all this when, unless appearances very much
belie him, he has not reached the age of sixty-four, which is the
minimum age at which the politician ceases to be young."

Winston Leonard Spencer Churchill was born thirty-two years ago, in
November, 1874. By birth he is half-American. His father was Lord
Randolph Churchill, and his mother was Jennie Jerome, of New York.
On the father's side he is the grandchild of the seventh Duke of
Marlborough, on the distaff side, of Leonard Jerome.

To a student of heredity it would be interesting to try and discover
from which of these ancestors Churchill drew those qualities which in
him are most prominent, and which have led to his success.

What he owes to his father and mother it is difficult to overestimate,
almost as difficult as to overestimate what he has accomplished by his
own efforts.

He was not a child born a full-grown genius of commonplace parents.
Rather his fate threatened that he should always be known as the son
of his father. And certainly it was asking much of a boy that he should
live up to a father who was one of the most conspicuous, clever, and
erratic statesmen of the later Victorian era, and a mother who is as
brilliant as she is beautiful.

For at no time was the American wife content to be merely ornamental.
Throughout the political career of her husband she was his helpmate, and
as an officer of the Primrose League, as an editor of the _Anglo-Saxon
Review_, as, for many hot, weary months in Durban Harbor, the head
of the hospital ship _Maine_, she has shown an acute mind and real
executive power. At the polls many votes that would not respond to the
arguments of the husband, and later of the son, were gained over to the
cause by the charm and wit of the American woman.

In his earlier days, if one can have days any earlier than those he now
enjoys, Churchill was entirely influenced by two things: the tremendous
admiration he felt for his father, which filled him with ambition to
follow in his orbit, and the camaraderie of his mother, who treated him
less like a mother than a sister and companion.

Indeed, Churchill was always so precocious that I cannot recall the time
when he was young enough to be Lady Randolph's son; certainly, I cannot
recall the time when she was old enough to be his mother.

When first I knew him he had passed through Harrow and Sandhurst and was
a second lieutenant in the Queen's Own Hussars. He was just of age, but
appeared much younger.

He was below medium height, a slight, delicate-looking boy; although, as
a matter of fact, extremely strong, with blue eyes, many freckles, and
hair which threatened to be a decided red, but which now has lost its
fierceness. When he spoke it was with a lisp, which also has changed,
and which now appears to be merely an intentional hesitation.

His manner of speaking was nervous, eager, explosive. He used many
gestures, some of which were strongly reminiscent of his father, of
whom he, unlike most English lads, who shy at mentioning a distinguished
parent, constantly spoke.

He even copied his father in his little tricks of manner. Standing with
hands shoved under the frock-coat and one resting on each hip as though
squeezing in the waist line; when seated, resting the elbows on the arms
of the chair and nervously locking and unclasping fingers, are tricks
common to both.

He then had and still has a most embarrassing habit of asking many
questions; embarrassing, sometimes, because the questions are so frank,
and sometimes because they lay bare the wide expanse of one's own
ignorance.

At that time, although in his twenty-first year, this lad twice had been
made a question in the House of Commons.

That in itself had rendered him conspicuous. When you consider out of
Great Britain's four hundred million subjects how many live, die, and
are buried without at any age having drawn down upon themselves the
anger of the House of Commons, to have done so twice, before one has
passed his twenty-first year, seems to promise a lurid future.

The first time Churchill disturbed the august assemblage in which so
soon he was to become a leader was when he "ragged" a brother subaltern
named Bruce and cut up his saddle and accoutrements. The second time was
when he ran away to Cuba to fight with the Spaniards.

After this campaign, on the first night of his arrival in London, he
made his maiden speech. He delivered it in a place of less dignity
than the House of Commons, but one, throughout Great Britain and her
colonies, as widely known and as well supported. This was the Empire
Music Hall.

At the time Mrs. Ormiston Chant had raised objections to the presence in
the Music Hall of certain young women, and had threatened, unless they
ceased to frequent its promenade, to have the license of the Music Hall
revoked. As a compromise, the management ceased selling liquor, and
on the night Churchill visited the place the bar in the promenade was
barricaded with scantling and linen sheets. With the thirst of tropical
Cuba still upon him, Churchill asked for a drink, which was denied him,
and the crusade, which in his absence had been progressing fiercely,
was explained. Any one else would have taken no for his answer, and
have sought elsewhere for his drink. Not so Churchill. What he did is
interesting, because it was so extremely characteristic. Now he would
not do it; then he was twenty-one.

He scrambled to the velvet-covered top of the railing which divides
the auditorium from the promenade, and made a speech. It was a plea in
behalf of his "Sisters, the Ladies of the Empire Promenade."

"Where," he asked of the ladies themselves and of their escorts crowded
below him in the promenade, "does the Englishman in London always find a
welcome? Where does he first go when, battle-scarred and travel-worn,
he reaches home? Who is always there to greet him with a smile, and
join him in a drink? Who is ever faithful, ever true--the Ladies of the
Empire Promenade."

The laughter and cheers that greeted this, and the tears of the ladies
themselves, naturally brought the performance on the stage to a stop,
and the vast audience turned in the seats and boxes.

They saw a little red-haired boy in evening clothes, balancing himself
on the rail of the balcony, and around him a great crowd, cheering,
shouting, and bidding him "Go on!"

Churchill turned with delight to the larger audience, and repeated his
appeal. The house shook with laughter and applause.

The commissionaires and police tried to reach him and a good-tempered
but very determined mob of well-dressed gentlemen and cheering girls
fought them back. In triumph Churchill ended his speech by begging his
hearers to give "fair play" to the women, and to follow him in a charge
upon the barricades.

The charge was instantly made, the barricades were torn down, and the
terrified management ordered that drink be served to its victorious
patrons.

Shortly after striking this blow for the liberty of others, Churchill
organized a dinner which illustrated the direction in which at that age
his mind was working, and showed that his ambition was already abnormal.
The dinner was given to those of his friends and acquaintances who "were
under twenty-one years of age, and who in twenty years would control the
destinies of the British Empire."

As one over the age limit, or because he did not consider me an
empire-controlling force, on this great occasion, I was permitted to
be present. But except that the number of incipient empire-builders was
very great, that they were very happy, and that save the host himself
none of them took his idea seriously, I would not call it an evening of
historical interest. But the fact is interesting that of all the
boys present, as yet, the host seems to be the only one who to any
conspicuous extent is disturbing the destinies of Great Britain.
However, the others can reply that ten of the twenty years have not yet
passed.

When he was twenty-three Churchill obtained leave of absence from his
regiment, and as there was no other way open to him to see fighting, as
a correspondent he joined the Malakand Field Force in India.

It may be truthfully said that by his presence in that frontier war he
made it and himself famous. His book on that campaign is his best piece
of war reporting. To the civilian reader it has all the delight of one
of Kipling's Indian stories, and to writers on military subjects it is
a model. But it is a model very few can follow, and which Churchill
himself was unable to follow, for the reason that only once is it given
a man to be twenty-three years of age.

The picturesque hand-to-hand fighting, the night attacks, the charges up
precipitous hills, the retreats made carrying the wounded under constant
fire, which he witnessed and in which he bore his part, he never
again can see with the same fresh and enthusiastic eyes. Then it was
absolutely new, and the charm of the book and the value of the book are
that with the intolerance of youth he attacks in the service evils that
older men prefer to let lie, and that with the ingenuousness of youth he
tells of things which to the veteran have become unimportant, or which
through usage he is no longer even able to see.

In his three later war books, the wonder of it, the horror of it, the
quick admiration for brave deeds and daring men, give place, in "The
River War," to the critical point of view of the military expert, and
in his two books on the Boer war to the rapid impressions of the
journalist. In these latter books he tells you of battles he has seen,
in the first one he made you see them.

For his services with the Malakand Field Force he received the campaign
medal with clasp, and, "in despatches," Brigadier-General Jeffreys
praises "the courage and resolution of Lieutenant W. L. S. Churchill,
Fourth Hussars, with the force as correspondent of the _Pioneer_."

From the operations around Malakand, he at once joined Sir William
Lockhart as orderly officer, and with the Tirah Expedition went through
that campaign.

For this his Indian medal gained a second clasp.

This was in the early part of 1898. In spite of the time taken up as
an officer and as a correspondent, he finished his book on the Malakand
Expedition and then, as it was evident Kitchener would soon attack
Khartum, he jumped across to Egypt and again as a correspondent took
part in the advance upon that city.

Thus, in one year, he had seen service in three campaigns.

On the day of the battle his luck followed him. Kitchener had attached
him to the Twenty-first Lancers, and it will be remembered the event of
the battle was the charge made by that squadron. It was no canter, no
easy "pig-sticking"; it was a fight to get in and a fight to get out,
with frenzied followers of the Khalifa hanging to the bridle reins,
hacking at the horses' hamstrings, and slashing and firing point-blank
at the troopers. Churchill was in that charge. He received the medal
with clasp.

Then he returned home and wrote "The River War." This book is the last
word on the campaigns up the Nile. From the death of Gordon in Khartum
to the capture of the city by Kitchener, it tells the story of the many
gallant fights, the wearying failures, the many expeditions into the
hot, boundless desert, the long, slow progress toward the final winning
of the Sudan.

The book made a distinct sensation. It was a work that one would expect
from a lieutenant-general, when, after years of service in Egypt, he
laid down his sword to pen the story of his life's work. From a Second
Lieutenant, who had been on the Nile hardly long enough to gain the
desert tan, it was a revelation. As a contribution to military history
it was so valuable that for the author it made many admirers, but on
account of his criticisms of his superior officers it gained him even
more enemies.

This is a specimen of the kind of thing that caused the retired army
officer to sit up and choke with apoplexy:

"General Kitchener, who never spares himself, cares little for others.
He treated all men like machines, from the private soldiers, whose
salutes he disdained, to the superior officers, whom he rigidly
controlled. The comrade who had served with him and under him for many
years, in peace and peril, was flung aside as soon as he ceased to be of
use. The wounded Egyptian and even the wounded British soldier did not
excite his interest."

When in the service clubs they read that, the veterans asked each other
their favorite question of what is the army coming to, and to their
own satisfaction answered it by pointing out that when a lieutenant of
twenty-four can reprimand the commanding general the army is going to
the dogs.

To the newspapers, hundreds of them, over their own signatures, on
the service club stationery, wrote violent, furious letters, and the
newspapers themselves, besides the ordinary reviews, gave to the book
editorial praise and editorial condemnation.

Equally disgusted were the younger officers of the service. They
nicknamed his book "A Subaltern's Advice to Generals," and called
Churchill himself a "Medal Snatcher." A medal snatcher is an officer
who, whenever there is a rumor of war, leaves his men to the care of
any one, and through influence in high places and for the sake of the
campaign medal has himself attached to the expeditionary force. But
Churchill never was a medal hunter. The routine of barrack life irked
him, and in foreign parts he served his country far better than by
remaining at home and inspecting awkward squads and attending guard
mount. Indeed, the War Office could cover with medals the man who wrote
"The Story of the Malakand Field Force" and "The River War" and still be
in his debt.

In October, 1898, a month after the battle of Omdurman, Churchill
made his debut as a political speaker at minor meetings in Dover and
Rotherhithe. History does not record that these first speeches set fire
to the Channel. During the winter he finished and published his "River
War," and in the August of the following summer, 1899, at a by-election,
offered himself as Member of Parliament for Oldham.

In the _Daily Telegraph_ his letters from the three campaigns in India
and Egypt had made his name known, and there was a general desire to
hear him and to see him. In one who had attacked Kitchener of Khartum,
the men of Oldham expected to find a stalwart veteran, bearded, and with
a voice of command. When they were introduced to a small red-haired boy
with a lisp, they refused to take him seriously. In England youth is an
unpardonable thing. Lately, Curzon, Churchill, Edward Grey, Hugh Cecil,
and others have made it less reprehensible. But, in spite of a vigorous
campaign, in which Lady Randolph took an active part, Oldham decided
it was not ready to accept young Churchill for a member. Later he was
Oldham's only claim to fame.

A week after he was defeated he sailed for South Africa, where war with
the Boers was imminent. He had resigned from his regiment and went south
as war correspondent for the _Morning Post_.

Later in the war he held a commission as Lieutenant in the South African
Light Horse, a regiment of irregular cavalry, and on the staffs
of different generals acted as galloper and aide-de-camp. To this
combination of duties, which was in direct violation of a rule of the
War Office, his brother officers and his fellow correspondents objected;
but, as in each of his other campaigns he had played this dual role, the
press censors considered it a traditional privilege, and winked at it.
As a matter of record, Churchill's soldiering never seemed to interfere
with his writing, nor, in a fight, did his duty to his paper ever
prevent him from mixing in as a belligerent.

War was declared October 9th, and only a month later, while scouting in
the armored train along the railroad line between Pietermaritzburg and
Colenso, the cars were derailed and Churchill was taken prisoner.

The train was made up of three flat cars, two armored cars, and between
them the engine, with three cars coupled to the cow-catcher and two to
the tender.

On the outward trip the Boers did not show themselves, but as soon as
the English passed Frere station they rolled a rock on the track at a
point where it was hidden by a curve. On the return trip, as the English
approached this curve the Boers opened fire with artillery and pompoms.
The engineer, in his eagerness to escape, rounded the curve at full
speed, and, as the Boers had expected, hit the rock. The three forward
cars were derailed, and one of them was thrown across the track, thus
preventing the escape of the engine and the two rear cars. From these
Captain Haldane, who was in command, with a detachment of the Dublins,
kept up a steady fire on the enemy, while Churchill worked to clear the
track. To assist him he had a company of Natal volunteers, and those who
had not run away of the train hands and break-down crew.

"We were not long left in the comparative safety of a railroad
accident," Churchill writes to his paper. "The Boers' guns, swiftly
changing their position, reopened fire from a distance of thirteen
hundred yards before any one had got out of the stage of exclamations.
The tapping rifle-fire spread along the hills, until it encircled the
wreckage on three sides, and from some high ground on the opposite side
of the line a third field-gun came into action."

For Boer marksmen with Mausers and pompoms, a wrecked railroad train
at thirteen hundred yards was as easy a bull's-eye as the hands of the
first baseman to the pitcher, and while the engine butted and snorted
and the men with their bare bands tore at the massive beams of the
freight-car, the bullets and shells beat about them.

"I have had in the last four years many strange and varied experiences,"
continues young Churchill, "but nothing was so thrilling as this; to
wait and struggle among these clanging, rending iron boxes, with the
repeated explosions of the shells, the noise of the projectiles striking
the cars, the hiss as they passed in the air, the grunting and puffing
of the engine--poor, tortured thing, hammered by at least a dozen
shells, any one of which, by penetrating the boiler, might have made an
end of all--the expectation of destruction as a matter of course, the
realization of powerlessness--all this for seventy minutes by the clock,
with only four inches of twisted iron between danger, captivity, and
shame on one side--and freedom on the other."

The "protected" train had proved a deathtrap, and by the time the line
was clear every fourth man was killed or wounded. Only the engine,
with the more severely wounded heaped in the cab and clinging to its
cow-catcher and foot-rails, made good its escape. Among those left
behind, a Tommy, without authority, raised a handkerchief on his rifle,
and the Boers instantly ceased firing and came galloping forward to
accept surrender. There was a general stampede to escape. Seeing that
Lieutenant Franklin was gallantly trying to hold his men, Churchill,
who was safe on the engine, jumped from it and ran to his assistance. Of
what followed, this is his own account:

"Scarcely had the locomotive left me than I found myself alone in a
shallow cutting, and none of our soldiers, who had all surrendered,
to be seen. Then suddenly there appeared on the line at the end of the
cutting two men not in uniform. 'Plate-layers,' I said to myself, and
then, with a surge of realization, 'Boers.' My mind retains a momentary
impression of these tall figures, full of animated movement, clad in
dark flapping clothes, with slouch, storm-driven hats, posing their
rifles hardly a hundred yards away. I turned and ran between the
rails of the track, and the only thought I achieved was this: 'Boer
marksmanship.'

"Two bullets passed, both within a foot, one on either side. I flung
myself against the banks of the cutting. But they gave no cover. Another
glance at the figures; one was now kneeling to aim. Again I darted
forward. Again two soft kisses sucked in the air, but nothing struck me.
I must get out of the cutting--that damnable corridor. I scrambled up
the bank. The earth sprang up beside me, and a bullet touched my hand,
but outside the cutting was a tiny depression. I crouched in this,
struggling to get my wind. On the other side of the railway a horseman
galloped up, shouting to me and waving his hand. He was scarcely forty
yards off. With a rifle I could have killed him easily. I knew nothing
of the white flag, and the bullets had made me savage. I reached down
for my Mauser pistol. I had left it in the cab of the engine. Between me
and the horseman there was a wire fence. Should I continue to fly?
The idea of another shot at such a short range decided me. Death stood
before me, grim and sullen; Death without his light-hearted companion,
Chance. So I held up my hand, and like Mr. Jorrock's foxes, cried
'Capivy!' Then I was herded with the other prisoners in a miserable
group, and about the same time I noticed that my hand was bleeding, and
it began to pour with rain.

"Two days before I had written to an officer at home: 'There has been a
great deal too much surrendering in this war, and I hope people who do
so will not be encouraged.'"

With other officers, Churchill was imprisoned in the State Model
Schools, situated in the heart of Pretoria. It was distinctly
characteristic that on the very day of his arrival he began to plan to
escape.

Toward this end his first step was to lose his campaign hat, which he
recognized was too obviously the hat of an English officer. The burgher
to whom he gave money to purchase him another innocently brought him a
Boer sombrero.

Before his chance to escape came a month elapsed, and the opportunity
that then offered was less an opportunity to escape than to get himself
shot.

The State Model Schools were surrounded by the children's playgrounds,
penned in by a high wall, and at night, while they were used as a
prison, brilliantly lighted by electric lights. After many nights of
observation, Churchill discovered that while the sentries were pacing
their beats there was a moment when to them a certain portion of the
wall was in darkness. This was due to cross-shadows cast by the electric
lights. On the other side of this wall there was a private house set in
a garden filled with bushes. Beyond this was the open street.

To scale the wall was not difficult; the real danger lay in the fact
that at no time were the sentries farther away than fifteen yards, and
the chance of being shot by one or both of them was excellent. To a
brother officer Churchill confided his purpose, and together they agreed
that some night when the sentries had turned from the dark spot on the
wall they would scale it and drop among the bushes in the garden. After
they reached the garden, should they reach it alive, what they were to
do they did not know. How they were to proceed through the streets
and out of the city, how they were to pass unchallenged under its many
electric lights and before the illuminated shop windows, how to dodge
patrols, and how to find their way through two hundred and eighty
miles of a South African wilderness, through an utterly unfamiliar,
unfriendly, and sparsely settled country into Portuguese territory and
the coast, they left to chance. But with luck they hoped to cover the
distance in a fortnight, begging corn at the Kaffir kraals, sleeping by
day, and marching under cover of the darkness.

They agreed to make the attempt on the 11th of December, but on that
night the sentries did not move from the only part of the wall that was
in shadow. On the night following, at the last moment, something delayed
Churchill's companion, and he essayed the adventure alone. He writes:

"Tuesday, the 12th! Anything was better than further suspense. Again
night came. Again the dinner bell sounded. Choosing my opportunity,
I strolled across the quadrangle and secreted myself in one of the
offices. Through a chink I watched the sentries. For half an hour they
remained stolid and obstructive. Then suddenly one turned and walked up
to his comrade and they began to talk. Their backs were turned.

"I darted out of my hiding-place and ran to the wall, seized the top with
my hands and drew myself up. Twice I let myself down again in sickly
hesitation, and then with a third resolve scrambled up. The top was
flat. Lying on it, I had one parting glimpse of the sentries, still
talking, still with their backs turned, but, I repeat, still fifteen
yards away. Then I lowered myself into the adjoining garden and crouched
among the shrubs. I was free. The first step had been taken, and it was
irrevocable."

Churchill discovered that the house into the garden of which he had so
unceremoniously introduced himself was brilliantly lighted, and that the
owner was giving a party. At one time two of the guests walked into the
garden and stood, smoking and chatting, in the path within a few yards
of him.

Thinking his companion might yet join him, for an hour he crouched in
the bushes, until from the other side of the wall he heard the voices of
his friend and of another officer.

"It's all up!" his friend whispered. Churchill coughed tentatively.
The two voices drew nearer. To confuse the sentries, should they be
listening, the one officer talked nonsense, laughed loudly, and quoted
Latin phrases, while the other, in a low and distinct voice, said:
"I cannot get out. The sentry suspects. It's all up. Can you get back
again?"

To go back was impossible. Churchill now felt that in any case he was
sure to be recaptured, and decided he would, as he expresses it, at
least have a run for his money.

"I shall go on alone," he whispered.

He heard the footsteps of his two friends move away from him across the
play yard. At the same moment he stepped boldly out into the garden and,
passing the open windows of the house, walked down the gravel path to
the street. Not five yards from the gate stood a sentry. Most of those
guarding the school-house knew him by sight, but Churchill did not turn
his head, and whether the sentry recognized him or not, he could not
tell.

For a hundred feet he walked as though on ice, inwardly shrinking as he
waited for the sharp challenge, and the rattle of the Mauser thrown to
the "Ready." His nerves were leaping, his heart in his throat, his spine
of water. And then, as he continued to advance, and still no tumult
pursued him, he quickened his pace and turned into one of the main
streets of Pretoria. The sidewalks were crowded with burghers, but no
one noticed him. This was due probably to the fact that the Boers wore
no distinctive uniform, and that with them in their commandoes were many
English Colonials who wore khaki riding breeches, and many Americans,
French, Germans, and Russians, in every fashion of semi-uniform.

If observed, Churchill was mistaken for one of these, and the very
openness of his movements saved him from suspicion.

Straight through the town he walked until he reached the suburbs, the
open veldt, and a railroad track. As he had no map or compass he knew
this must be his only guide, but he knew also that two railroads left
Pretoria, the one along which he had been captured, to Pietermaritzburg,
and the other, the one leading to the coast and freedom. Which of the
two this one was he had no idea, but he took his chance, and a hundred
yards beyond a station waited for the first outgoing train. About
midnight, a freight stopped at the station, and after it had left it and
before it had again gathered headway, Churchill swung himself up upon
it, and stretched out upon a pile of coal. Throughout the night the
train continued steadily toward the east, and so told him that it was
the one he wanted, and that he was on his way to the neutral territory
of Portugal.

Fearing the daylight, just before the sun rose, as the train was pulling
up a steep grade, he leaped off into some bushes. All that day he lay
hidden, and the next night he walked. He made but little headway. As all
stations and bridges were guarded, he had to make long detours, and the
tropical moonlight prevented him from crossing in the open. In this way,
sleeping by day, walking by night, begging food from the Kaffirs, five
days passed.

Meanwhile, his absence had been at once discovered, and, by the
Boers, every effort was being made to retake him. Telegrams giving his
description were sent along both railways, three thousand photographs
of him were distributed, each car of every train was searched, and
in different parts of the Transvaal men who resembled him were being
arrested. It was said he had escaped dressed as a woman; in the uniform
of a Transvaal policeman whom he had bribed; that he had never left
Pretoria, and that in the disguise of a waiter he was concealed in the
house of a British sympathizer. On the strength of this rumor the houses
of all suspected persons were searched.

In the Volksstem it was pointed out as a significant fact that a week
before his escape Churchill had drawn from the library Mill's "Essay on
Liberty."

In England and over all British South Africa the escape created as much
interest as it did in Pretoria. Because the attempt showed pluck, and
because he had outwitted the enemy, Churchill for the time became a sort
of popular hero, and to his countrymen his escape gave as much pleasure
as it was a cause of chagrin to the Boers.

But as days passed and nothing was heard of him, it was feared he
had lost himself in the Machadodorp Mountains, or had succumbed
to starvation, or, in the jungle toward the coast, to fever, and
congratulations gave way to anxiety.

The anxiety was justified, for at this time Churchill was in a very bad
way. During the month in prison he had obtained but little exercise. The
lack of food and of water, the cold by night and the terrific heat by
day, the long stumbling marches in the darkness, the mental effect upon
an extremely nervous, high-strung organization of being hunted, and of
having to hide from his fellow men, had worn him down to a condition
almost of collapse.

Even though it were neutral soil, in so exhausted a state he dared not
venture into the swamps and waste places of the Portuguese territory;
and, sick at heart as well as sick in body, he saw no choice left him
save to give himself up.

But before doing so he carefully prepared a tale which, although most
improbable, he hoped might still conceal his identity and aid him to
escape by train across the border.

One night after days of wandering he found himself on the outskirts of
a little village near the boundary line of the Transvaal and Portuguese
territory. Utterly unable to proceed further, he crawled to the nearest
zinc-roofed shack, and, fully prepared to surrender, knocked at the
door. It was opened by a rough-looking, bearded giant, the first white
man to whom in many days Churchill had dared address himself.

To him, without hope, he feebly stammered forth the speech he had
rehearsed. The man listened with every outward mark of disbelief. At
Churchill himself he stared with open suspicion. Suddenly he seized the
boy by the shoulder, drew him inside the hut, and barred the door.

"You needn't lie to me," he said. "You are Winston Churchill, and I--am
the only Englishman in this village."

The rest of the adventure was comparatively easy. The next night his
friend in need, an engineer named Howard, smuggled Churchill Into a
freight-car, and hid him under sacks of some soft merchandise.

At Komatie-Poort, the station on the border, for eighteen hours the car
in which Churchill lay concealed was left in the sun on a siding, and
before it again started it was searched, but the man who was conducting
the search lifted only the top layer of sacks, and a few minutes later
Churchill heard the hollow roar of the car as it passed over the bridge,
and knew that he was across the border.

Even then he took no chances, and for two days more lay hidden at the
bottom of the car.

When at last he arrived in Lorenzo Marques he at once sought out the
English Consul, who, after first mistaking him for a stoker from one of
the ships in the harbor, gave him a drink, a bath, and a dinner.

As good luck would have it, the _Induna_ was leaving that night for
Durban, and, escorted by a body-guard of English residents armed with
revolvers, and who were taking no chances of his recapture by the Boer
agents, he was placed safely on board. Two days later he arrived at
Durban, where he was received by the Mayor, the populace, and a brass
band playing: "Britons Never, Never, Never shall be Slaves!"

For the next month Churchill was bombarded by letters and telegrams
from every part of the globe, some invited him to command filibustering
expeditions, others sent him woollen comforters, some forwarded
photographs of himself to be signed, others photographs of themselves,
possibly to be admired, others sent poems, and some bottles of whiskey.

One admirer wrote: "My congratulations on your wonderful and glorious
deeds, which will send such a thrill of pride and enthusiasm through
Great Britain and the United States of America, that the Anglo-Saxon
race will be irresistible."

Lest so large an order as making the Anglo-Saxon race irresistible might
turn the head of a subaltern, an antiseptic cablegram was also sent him,
from London, reading:

"Best friends here hope you won't go making further ass of yourself.

"McNEILL."

One day in camp we counted up the price per word of this cablegram, and
Churchill was delighted to find that it must have cost the man who sent
it five pounds.

On the day of his arrival in Durban, with the cheers still in the air,
Churchill took the first train to "the front," then at Colenso. Another
man might have lingered. After a month's imprisonment and the hardships
of the escape, he might have been excused for delaying twenty-four hours
to taste the sweets of popularity and the flesh-pots of the Queen Hotel.
But if the reader has followed this brief biography he will know that
to have done so would have been out of the part. This characteristic of
Churchill's to get on to the next thing explains his success. He has no
time to waste on postmortems, he takes none to rest on his laurels.

As a war correspondent and officer he continued with Buller until the
relief of Ladysmith, and with Roberts until the fall of Pretoria. He
was in many actions, in all the big engagements, and came out of the war
with another medal and clasps for six battles.

On his return to London he spent the summer finishing his second book on
the war, and in October at the general election as a "khaki" candidate,
as those were called who favored the war, again stood for Oldham. This
time, with his war record to help him, he wrested from the Liberals one
of Oldham's two seats. He had been defeated by thirteen hundred votes;
he was elected by a majority of two hundred and twenty-seven.

The few months that intervened between his election and the opening of
the new Parliament were snatched by Churchill for a lecturing tour at
home, and in the United States and Canada. His subject was the war and
his escape from Pretoria.

When he came to this country half of the people here were in sympathy
with the Boers, and did not care to listen to what they supposed would
be a strictly British version of the war. His manager, without asking
permission of those whose names he advertised, organized for Churchill's
first appearance in various cities, different reception committees.

Some of those whose names, without their consent, were used for these
committees, wrote indignantly to the papers, saying that while for
Churchill, personally, they held every respect, they objected to being
used to advertise an anti-Boer demonstration.

While this was no fault of Churchill's, who, until he reached this
country knew nothing of it, it was neither for him nor for the success
of his tour the best kind of advance work.

During the fighting to relieve Ladysmith, with General Buller's force,
Churchill and I had again been together, and later when I joined the
Boer army, at the Zand River Battle, the army with which he was a
correspondent had chased the army with which I was a correspondent,
forty miles. I had been one of those who refused to act on his reception
committee, and he had come to this country with a commission from twenty
brother officers to shoot me on sight. But in his lecture he was using
the photographs I had taken of the scene of his escape, and which I had
sent him from Pretoria as a souvenir, and when he arrived I was at the
hotel to welcome him, and that same evening three hours after midnight
he came, in a blizzard, pounding at our door for food and drink. What is
a little thing like a war between friends?

During his "tour," except of hotels, parlor-cars, and "Lyceums," he saw
very little of this country or of its people, and they saw very little
of him. On the trip, which lasted about two months, he cleared ten
thousand dollars. This, to a young man almost entirely dependent for an
income upon his newspaper work and the sale of his books, nearly repaid
him for the two months of "one night stands." On his return to London he
took his seat in the new Parliament.

It was a coincidence that he entered Parliament at the same age as
did his father. With two other members, one born six days earlier than
himself, he enjoyed the distinction of being among the three youngest
members of the new House.

The fact did not seem to appall him. In the House it is a tradition that
young and ambitious members sit "below" the gangway; the more modest
and less assured are content to place themselves "above" it, at a point
farthest removed from the leaders.

On the day he was sworn in there was much curiosity to see where
Churchill would elect to sit. In his own mind there was apparently no
doubt. After he had taken the oath, signed his name, and shaken the hand
of the Speaker, without hesitation he seated himself on the bench next
to the Ministry. Ten minutes later, so a newspaper of the day describes
it, he had cocked his hat over his eyes, shoved his hands into his
trousers pockets, and was lolling back eying the veterans of the House
with critical disapproval.

His maiden speech was delivered in May, 1901, in reply to David Lloyd
George, who had attacked the conduct of British soldiers in South
Africa. Churchill defended them, and in a manner that from all sides
gained him honest admiration. In the course of the debate he produced
and read a strangely apropos letter which, fifteen years before, had
been written by his father to Lord Salisbury. His adroit use of
this filled H. W. Massingham, the editor of the _Daily News_, with
enthusiasm. Nothing in parliamentary tactics, he declared, since Mr.
Gladstone died, had been so clever. He proclaimed that Churchill would
be Premier. John Dillon, the Nationalist leader, said he never before
had seen a young man, by means of his maiden effort, spring into the
front rank of parliamentary speakers. He promised that the Irish members
would ungrudgingly testify to his ability and honesty of purpose. Among
others to at once recognize the rising star was T. P. O'Connor, himself
for many years of the parliamentary firmament one of the brightest
stars. In _M. A. P._ he wrote: "I am inclined to think that the dash of
American blood which he has from his mother has been an improvement on
the original stock, and that Mr. Winston Churchill may turn out to be a
stronger and abler politician than his father."

It was all a part of Churchill's "luck" that when he entered Parliament
the subject in debate was the conduct of the war.

Even in those first days of his career in the House, in debates where
angels feared to tread, he did not hesitate to rush in, but this subject
was one on which he spoke with knowledge. Over the older men who were
forced to quote from hearsay or from what they had read, Churchill had
the tremendous advantage of being able to protest: "You only read of
that. I was there. I saw it."

In the House he became at once one of the conspicuous and picturesque
figures, one dear to the heart of the caricaturist, and one from the
strangers' gallery most frequently pointed out. He was called "the
spoiled child of the House," and there were several distinguished
gentlemen who regretted they were forced to spare the rod. Broderick,
the Secretary for War, was one of these. Of him and of his recruits in
South Africa, Churchill spoke with the awful frankness of the _enfant
terrible_. And although he addressed them more with sorrow than with
anger, to Balfour and Chamberlain he daily administered advice and
reproof, while mere generals and field-marshals, like Kitchener and
Roberts, blushing under new titles, were held up for public reproof and
briefly but severely chastened. Nor, when he saw Lord Salisbury going
astray, did he hesitate in his duty to the country, but took the Prime
Minister by the hand and gently instructed him in the way he should go.

This did not tend to make him popular, but in spite of his unpopularity,
in his speeches against national extravagancies he made so good a fight
that he forced the Government, unwillingly, to appoint a committee to
investigate the need of economy. For a beginner this was a distinct
triumph.

With Lord Hugh Cecil, Lord Percy, Ian Malcolm, and other clever young
men, he formed inside the Conservative Party a little group that in its
obstructive and independent methods was not unlike the Fourth Party of
his father. From its leader and its filibustering, guerilla-like tactics
the men who composed it were nicknamed the "Hughligans." The Hughligans
were the most active critics of the Ministry and of all in their own
party, and as members of the Free Food League they bitterly attacked
the fiscal proposals of Mr. Chamberlain. When Balfour made Chamberlain's
fight for fair trade, or for what virtually was protection, a measure
of the Conservatives, the lines of party began to break, and men were no
longer Conservatives or Liberals, but Protectionists or Free Traders.

Against this Churchill daily protested, against Chamberlain, against his
plan, against that plan being adopted by the Tory Party. By tradition,
by inheritance, by instinct, Churchill was a Tory.

"I am a Tory," he said, "and I have as much right in the party as has
anybody else, certainly as much as certain people from Birmingham. They
can't turn us out, and we, the Tory Free Traders, have as much right
to dictate the policy of the Conservative Party as have any reactionary
Fair Traders." In 1904 the Conservative Party already recognized
Churchill as one working outside the breastworks. Just before the Easter
vacation of that year, when he rose to speak a remarkable demonstration
was made against him by his Unionist colleagues, all of them rising and
leaving the House.

To the Liberals who remained to hear him he stated that if to his
constituents his opinions were obnoxious, he was ready to resign his
seat. It then was evident he would go over to the Liberal Party. Some
thought he foresaw which way the tidal wave was coming, and to being
slapped down on the beach and buried in the sand, he preferred to be
swept forward on its crest. Others believed he left the Conservatives
because he could not honestly stomach the taxed food offered by Mr.
Chamberlain.

In any event, if he were to be blamed for changing from one party to
the other, he was only following the distinguished example set him by
Gladstone, Disraeli, Harcourt, and his own father.

It was at the time of this change that he was called "the best hated
man in England," but the Liberals welcomed him gladly, and the National
Liberal Club paid him the rare compliment of giving in his honor a
banquet. There were present two hundred members. Up to that time this
dinner was the most marked testimony to his importance in the political
world. It was about then, a year since, that he prophesied: "Within
nine months there will come such a tide and deluge as will sweep through
England and Scotland, and completely wash out and effect a much-needed
spring cleaning in Downing Street."

When the deluge came, at Manchester, Mr. Balfour was defeated, and
Churchill was victorious, and when the new Government was formed the
tidal wave landed Churchill in the office of Under-Secretary for the
Colonies.

While this is being written the English papers say that within a
month he again will be promoted. For this young man of thirty the only
promotion remaining is a position in the Cabinet, in which august body
men of fifty are considered young.

His is a picturesque career. Of any man of his few years speaking our
language, his career is probably the most picturesque. And that he is
half an American gives all of us an excuse to pretend we share in his
successes.




CAPTAIN PHILO NORTON McGIFFIN

IN the Chinese-Japanese War the battle of the Yalu was the first battle
fought between warships of modern make, and, except on paper, neither
the men who made them nor the men who fought them knew what the ships
could do, or what they might not do. For years every naval power had
been building these new engines of war, and in the battle which was to
test them the whole world was interested. But in this battle Americans
had a special interest, a human, family interest, for the reason that
one of the Chinese squadron, which was matched against some of the same
vessels of Japan which lately swept those of Russia from the sea, was
commanded by a young graduate of the American Naval Academy. This young
man, who, at the time of the battle of the Yalu, was thirty-three years
old, was Captain Philo Norton McGiffin. So it appears that five years
before our fleet sailed to victory in Manila Bay another graduate of
Annapolis, and one twenty years younger than in 1898 was Admiral Dewey,
had commanded in action a modern battleship, which, in tonnage, in
armament, and in the number of the ships' company, far outclassed
Dewey's _Olympia_.

McGiffin, who was born on December 13, 1860, came of fighting stock.
Back in Scotland the family is descended from the Clan MacGregor and the
Clan MacAlpine.

"These are Clan-Alpine's warriors true, And, Saxon--I am Roderick Dhu."

McGiffin's great-grandfather, born in Scotland, emigrated to this
country and settled in "Little Washington," near Pittsburg, Pa. In the
Revolutionary War he was a soldier. Other relatives fought in the War of
1812, one of them holding a commission as major. McGiffin's own father
was Colonel Norton McGiffin, who served in the Mexican War, and in
the Civil War was Lieutenant-Colonel of the Eighty-fifth Pennsylvania
Volunteers. So McGiffin inherited his love for arms.

In Washington he went to the high school and at the Washington Jefferson
College had passed through his freshman year. But the honors that might
accrue to him if he continued to live on in the quiet and pretty old
town of Washington did not tempt him. To escape into the world he
wrote his Congressman, begging him to obtain for him an appointment to
Annapolis. The Congressman liked the letter, and wrote Colonel McGiffin
to ask if the application of his son had his approval. Colonel McGiffin
was willing, and in 1877 his son received his commission as cadet
midshipman. I knew McGiffin only as a boy with whom in vacation time I
went coon hunting in the woods outside of Washington. For his age he was
a very tall boy, and in his midshipman undress uniform, to my youthful
eyes, appeared a most bold and adventurous spirit.

At Annapolis his record seems to show he was pretty much like other
boys. According to his classmates, with all of whom I find he was very
popular, he stood high in the practical studies, such as seamanship,
gunnery, navigation, and steam engineering, but in all else he was near
the foot of the class, and in whatever escapade was risky and reckless
he was always one of the leaders. To him discipline was extremely
irksome. He could maintain it among others, but when it applied to
himself it bored him. On the floor of the Academy building on which was
his room there was a pyramid of cannon balls--relics of the War of 1812.
They stood at the head of the stairs, and one warm night, when he could
not sleep, he decided that no one else should do so, and, one by one,
rolled the cannon balls down the stairs. They tore away the banisters
and bumped through the wooden steps and leaped off into the lower halls.
For any one who might think of ascending to discover the motive power
back of the bombardment they were extremely dangerous. But an officer
approached McGiffin in the rear, and, having been caught in the act, he
was sent to the prison ship. There he made good friends with his jailer,
an old man-of-warsman named "Mike." He will be remembered by many naval
officers who as midshipmen served on the _Santee_. McGiffin so won
over Mike that when he left the ship he carried with him six charges of
gunpowder. These he loaded into the six big guns captured in the Mexican
War, which lay on the grass in the centre of the Academy grounds, and at
midnight on the eve of July 1st he fired a salute. It aroused the entire
garrison, and for a week the empty window frames kept the glaziers busy.

About 1878 or 1879 there was a famine in Ireland. The people of New York
City contributed provisions for the sufferers, and to carry the supplies
to Ireland the Government authorized the use of the old _Constellation_.
At the time the voyage was to begin each cadet was instructed to
consider himself as having been placed in command of the _Constellation_
and to write a report on the preparations made for the voyage, on the
loading of the vessel, and on the distribution of the stores. This
exercise was intended for the instruction of the cadets; first in the
matter of seamanship and navigation, and second in making official
reports. At that time it was a very difficult operation to get a gun out
of the port of a vessel where the gun was on a covered deck. To do this
the necessary tackles had to be rigged from the yard-arm and the yard
and mast properly braced and stayed, and then the lower block of the
tackle carried in through the gun port, which, of course, gave the fall
a very bad reeve. The first part of McGiffin's report dealt with a new
method of dismounting the guns and carrying them through the gun ports,
and so admirable was his plan, so simple and ingenious, that it was
used whenever it became necessary to dismount a gun from one of the
old sailing ships. Having, however, offered this piece of good work,
McGiffin's report proceeded to tell of the division of the ship into
compartments that were filled with a miscellaneous assortment of stores,
which included the old "fifteen puzzles," at that particular time very
popular. The report terminated with a description of the joy of the
famished Irish as they received the puzzle-boxes. At another time the
cadets were required to write a report telling of the suppression of the
insurrection on the Isthmus of Panama. McGiffin won great praise for
the military arrangements and disposition of his men, but, in the same
report, he went on to describe how he armed them with a new gun known as
Baines's Rhetoric and told of the havoc he wrought in the enemy's
ranks when he fired these guns loaded with similes and metaphors and
hyperboles.

Of course, after each exhibition of this sort he was sent to the
_Santee_ and given an opportunity to meditate.

On another occasion, when one of the instructors lectured to the cadets,
he required them to submit a written statement embodying all that they
could recall of what had been said at the lecture. One of the rules
concerning this report provided that there should be no erasures or
interlineations, but that when mistakes were made the objectionable or
incorrect expressions should be included within parentheses; and that
the matter so enclosed within parentheses would not be considered a part
of the report. McGiffin wrote an excellent _resume_ of the lecture,
but he interspersed through it in parentheses such words as "applause,"
"cheers," "cat-calls," and "groans," and as these words were enclosed
within parentheses he insisted that they did not count, and made a very
fair plea that he ought not to be punished for words which slipped in
by mistake, and which he had officially obliterated by what he called
oblivion marks.

He was not always on mischief bent. On one occasion, when the house of a
professor caught fire, McGiffin ran into the flames and carried out two
children, for which act he was commended by the Secretary of the Navy.

It was an act of Congress that determined that the career of McGiffin
should be that of a soldier of fortune. This was a most unjust act,
which provided that only as many midshipmen should receive commissions
as on the warships there were actual vacancies. In those days, in 1884,
our navy was very small. To-day there is hardly a ship having her full
complement of officers, and the difficulty is not to get rid of those we
have educated, but to get officers to educate. To the many boys who, on
the promise that they would be officers of the navy, had worked for
four years at the Academy and served two years at sea, the act was most
unfair. Out of a class of about ninety, only the first twelve were given
commissions and the remaining eighty turned adrift upon the uncertain
seas of civil life. As a sop, each was given one thousand dollars.

McGiffin was not one of the chosen twelve. In the final examinations on
the list he was well toward the tail. But without having studied
many things, and without remembering the greater part of them, no
one graduates from Annapolis, even last on the list; and with his one
thousand dollars in cash, McGiffin had also this six years of education
at what was then the best naval college in the world. This was his only
asset--his education--and as in his own country it was impossible to
dispose of it, for possible purchasers he looked abroad.

At that time the Tong King war was on between France and China, and he
decided, before it grew rusty, to offer his knowledge to the followers
of the Yellow Dragon. In those days that was a hazard of new fortunes
that meant much more than it does now. To-day the East is as near as San
Francisco; the Japanese-Russian War, our occupation of the Philippines,
the part played by our troops in the Boxer trouble, have made the
affairs of China part of the daily reading of every one. Now, one can
step into a brass bed at Forty-second Street and in four days at the
Coast get into another brass bed, and in twelve more be spinning down
the Bund of Yokohama in a rickshaw. People go to Japan for the winter
months as they used to go to Cairo.

But in 1885 it was no such light undertaking, certainly not for a young
man who had been brought up in the quiet atmosphere of an inland
town, where generations of his family and other families had lived and
intermarried, content with their surroundings.

With very few of his thousand dollars left him, McGiffin arrived in
February, 1885, in San Francisco. From there his letters to his family
give one the picture of a healthy, warm-hearted youth, chiefly anxious
lest his mother and sister should "worry." In our country nearly every
family knows that domestic tragedy when the son and heir "breaks home
ties," and starts out to earn a living; and if all the world loves a
lover, it at least sympathizes with the boy who is "looking for a job."
The boy who is looking for the job may not think so, but each of those
who has passed through the same hard place gives him, if nothing else,
his good wishes. McGiffin's letters at this period gain for him from
those who have had the privilege to read them the warmest good feeling.

They are filled with the same cheery optimism, the same slurring over
of his troubles, the same homely jokes, the same assurances that he is
feeling "bully," and that it all will come out right, that every boy,
when he starts out in the world, sends back to his mother.

"I am in first-rate health and spirits, so I don't want you to fuss
about me. I am big enough and ugly enough to scratch along somehow, and
I will not starve."

To his mother he proudly sends his name written in Chinese characters,
as he had been taught to write it by the Chinese Consul-General in San
Francisco, and a pen-picture of two elephants. "I am going to bring you
home _two_ of these," he writes, not knowing that in the strange and
wonderful country to which he is going elephants are as infrequent as
they are in Pittsburg.

He reached China in April, and from Nagasaki on his way to Shanghai
the steamer that carried him was chased by two French gunboats. But,
apparently much to his disappointment, she soon ran out of range of
their guns. Though he did not know it then, with the enemy he had
travelled so far to fight this was his first and last hostile meeting;
for already peace was in the air.

Of that and of how, in spite of peace, he obtained the "job" he wanted,
he must tell you himself in a letter home:

TIEN-TSIN, CHINA, April 13, 1885.

"MY DEAR MOTHER--I have not felt much in the humor for writing, for
I did not know what was going to happen. I spent a good deal of money
coming out, and when I got here, I knew, unless something turned up,
I was a gone coon. We got off Taku forts Sunday evening and the next
morning we went inside; the channel is very narrow and sown with
torpedoes. We struck one--an electric one--in coming up, but it didn't
go off. We were until 10.30 P.M. in coming up to Tien-Tsin--thirty miles
in a straight line, but nearly seventy by the river, which is only about
one hundred feet wide--and we grounded ten times.

"Well--at last we moored and went ashore. Brace Girdle, an engineer, and
I went to the hotel, and the first thing we heard was--that _peace was
declared!_ I went back on board ship, and I didn't sleep much--I never
was so blue in my life. I knew if they didn't want me that I might as
well give up the ghost, for I could never get away from China. Well--I
worried around all night without sleep, and in the morning I felt as
if I had been drawn through a knot-hole. I must have lost ten pounds. I
went around about 10 A.M. and gave my letters to Pethick, an American
U. S. Vice-Consul and interpreter to Li Hung Chang. He said he would fix
them for me. Then I went back to the ship, and as our captain was going
up to see Li Hung Chang, I went along out of desperation. We got in,
and after a while were taken in through corridor after corridor of the
Viceroy's palace until we got into the great Li, when we sat down and
had tea and tobacco and talked through an interpreter. When it came
my turn he asked: 'Why did you come to China?' I said: 'To enter the
Chinese service for the war.' 'How do you expect to enter?' 'I expect
_you_ to give me a commission!' 'I have no place to offer you.' 'I think
you have--I have come all the way from America to get it.' 'What would
you like?' 'I would like to get the new torpedo-boat and go down the
Yang-tse-Kiang to the blockading squadron.' 'Will you do that?' 'Of
course.'

"He thought a little and said: 'I will see what can be done. Will you
take $100 a month for a start?' I said: 'That depends.' (Of course
I would take it.) Well, after parley, he said he would put me on the
flagship, and if I did well he would promote me. Then he looked at me
and said: 'How old are you?' When I told him I was twenty-four I thought
he would faint--for in China a man is a _boy_ until he is over thirty.
He said I would _never_ do--I was a child. I could not know anything at
all. I could not convince him, but at last he compromised--I was to pass
an examination at the Arsenal at the Naval College, in all branches,
and if they passed me I would have a show. So we parted. I reported for
examination next day, but was put off--same the next day. But to-day I
was told to come, and sat down to a stock of foolscap, and had a
pretty stiff exam. I am only just through. I had seamanship, gunnery,
navigation, nautical astronomy, algebra, geometry, trigonometry, conic
sections, curve tracing, differential and integral calculus. I had only
three questions out of five to answer in each branch, but in the first
three I answered all five. After that I only had time for three, but
at the end he said I need not finish, he was perfectly satisfied. I had
done remarkably well, and he would report to the Viceroy to-morrow. He
examined my first papers--seamanship--said I was _perfect_ in it, so I
will get _along_, you need not fear. I told the Consul--he was very well
pleased--he is a nice man.

"I feel pretty well now--have had dinner and am smoking a good Manila
cheroot. I wrote hard all day, wrote fifteen sheets of foolscap and made
about a dozen drawings--got pretty tired.

"I have had a hard scramble for the service and only got in by the
skin of my teeth. I guess I will go to bed--I will sleep well
to-night--Thursday.

"I did not hear from the Naval Secretary, Tuesday, so yesterday morning
I went up to the Admiralty and sent in my card. He came out and received
me very well--said I had passed a 'very splendid examination'; had been
recommended very strongly to the Viceroy, who was very much pleased;
that the Director of the Naval College over at the Arsenal had wanted me
and would I go over at once? I _would_. It was about five miles. We (a
friend, who is a great rider here) went on steeplechase ponies--we were
ferried across the Pei Ho in a small scow and then had a long ride.
There _is_ a path--but Pritchard insisted on taking all the ditches,
and as my pony jumped like a cat, it wasn't nice at first, but I didn't
squeal and kept my seat and got the swing of it at last and rather liked
it. I think I will keep a horse here--you can hire one and a servant
together for $7 a month; that is $5.60 of our money, and pony and man
found in everything.

"Well--at last we got to the Arsenal--a place about four miles around,
fortified, where all sorts of arms--cartridges, shot and shell, engines,
and _everything_--are made. The Naval College is inside surrounded by
a moat and wall. I thought to myself, if the cadet here is like to the
thing I used to be at the U. S. N. A. _that_ won't keep him in. I went
through a lot of yards till I was ushered into a room finished in black
ebony and was greeted very warmly by the Director. We took seats on a
raised platform--Chinese style and pretty soon an interpreter came, one
of the Chinese professors, who was educated abroad, and we talked and
drank tea. He said I had done well, that he had the authority of the
Viceroy to take me there as 'Professor' of seamanship and gunnery; in
addition I might be required to teach navigation or nautical astronomy,
or drill the cadets in infantry, artillery, and fencing. For this I was
to receive what would be in our money $1,800 per annum, as near as we
can compare it, paid in gold each month. Besides, I will have a house
furnished for my use, and it is their intention, as soon as I _show_
that I _know_ something, to considerably increase my pay. They asked
the Viceroy to give me 130 T per month (about $186) and house, but the
Viceroy said I was _but a boy_; that I had seen no years and had only
come here a week ago with no one to vouch for me, and that I might turn
out an impostor. But he would risk 100 T on me anyhow, and as soon as
I was reported favorably on by the college I would be raised--the
agreement is to be for three years. For a few months I am to command
a training ship--an ironclad that is in dry dock at present, until a
captain in the English Navy comes out, who has been sent for to command
her.

"_So Here I am_--twenty-four years old and captain of a man-of-war--a
better one than any in our own navy--only for a short time, of course,
but I would be a pretty long time before I would command one at home.
Well--I accepted and will enter on my duties in a week, as soon as my
house is put in order. I saw it--it has a long veranda, very broad; with
flower garden, apricot trees, etc., just covered with blossoms; a wide
hall on the front, a room about 18x15, with a 13-foot ceiling; then back
another rather larger, with a cupola skylight in the centre, where I
am going to put a shelf with flowers. The Government is to furnish the
house with bed, tables, chairs, sideboards, lounges, stove for kitchen.
I have grates (American) in the room, but I don't need them. We have
snow, and a good deal of ice in winter, but the thermometer never gets
below zero. I have to supply my own crockery. I will have two servants
and cook; I will only get one and the cook first--they only cost $4
to $5.50 per month, and their board amounts to very little. I can get
along, don't you think so? Now I want you to get Jim to pack up all
my professional works on gunnery, surveying, seamanship, mathematics,
astronomy, algebra, geometry, trigonometry, conic sections, calculus,
mechanics, and _every_ book of that description I own, including those
paperbound 'Naval Institute' papers, and put them in a box, together
with any photos, etc., you think I would like--I have none of you or Pa
or the family (including Carrie)--and send to me.

"I just got in in time--didn't I? Another week would have been too late.
My funds were getting low; I would not have had _anything_ before long.
The U. S. Consul, General Bromley, is much pleased. The interpreter says
it was all in the way I did with the Viceroy in the interview.

"I will have a chance to go to Peking and later to a tiger hunt in
Mongolia, but for the present I am going to study, work, and _stroke_
these mandarins till I get a raise. I am the only instructor in both
seamanship and gunnery, and I must know _everything_, both practically
and theoretically. But it will be good for me and the only thing is,
that if I were put back into the Navy I would be in a dilemma. I think
I will get my 'influence' to work, and I want you people at home to
look out, and in case I _am_--if it were represented to the Sec. that
my position here was giving me an immense lot of practical knowledge
professionally--more than I could get on a ship at sea--I think he would
give me two years' leave on half or quarter pay. Or, I would be willing
to do without pay--only to be kept on the register in my rank.

"I will write more about this. Love to all."


It is characteristic of McGiffin that in the very same letter in which
he announces he has entered foreign service he plans to return to
that of his own country. This hope never left him. You find the same
homesickness for the quarterdeck of an American man-of-war all through
his later letters. At one time a bill to reinstate the midshipmen who
had been cheated of their commissions was introduced into Congress. Of
this McGiffin writes frequently as "our bill." "It may pass," he writes,
"but I am tired hoping. I have hoped so long. And if it should," he adds
anxiously, "there may be a time limit set in which a man must rejoin, or
lose his chance, so do not fail to let me know as quickly as you can."
But the bill did not pass, and McGiffin never returned to the navy that
had cut him adrift. He settled down at Tien-Tsin and taught the young
cadets how to shoot. Almost all of those who in the Chinese-Japanese War
served as officers were his pupils. As the navy grew, he grew with
it, and his position increased in importance. More Mexican dollars per
month, more servants, larger houses, and buttons of various honorable
colors were given him, and, in return, he established for China a modern
naval college patterned after our own. In those days throughout China
and Japan you could find many of these foreign advisers. Now, in Japan,
the Hon. W. H. Dennison of the Foreign Office, one of our own people, is
the only foreigner with whom the Japanese have not parted, and in China
there are none. Of all of those who have gone none served his employers
more faithfully than did McGiffin. At a time when every official
robbed the people and the Government, and when "squeeze" or "graft"
was recognized as a perquisite, McGiffin's hands were clean. The shells
purchased for the Government by him were not loaded with black sand,
nor were the rifles fitted with barrels of iron pipe. Once a year he
celebrated the Thanksgiving Day of his own country by inviting to a
great dinner all the Chinese naval officers who had been at least in
part educated in America. It was a great occasion, and to enjoy
it officers used to come from as far as Port Arthur, Shanghai, and
Hong-Kong. So fully did some of them appreciate the efforts of their
host that previous to his annual dinner, for twenty-four hours, they
delicately starved themselves.

During ten years McGiffin served as naval constructor and professor
of gunnery and seamanship, and on board ships at sea gave practical
demonstrations in the handling of the new cruisers. In 1894 he applied
for leave, which was granted, but before he had sailed for home war with
Japan was declared and he withdrew his application. He was placed
as second in command on board the _Chen Yuen_, a seven-thousand-ton
battleship, a sister ship to the _Ting Yuen_, the flagship of Admiral
Ting Ju Chang. On the memorable 17th of September, 1894, the battle of
the Yalu was fought, and so badly were the Chinese vessels hammered that
the Chinese navy, for the time being, was wiped out of existence.

From the start the advantage was with the Japanese fleet. In heavy guns
the Chinese were the better armed, but in quick-firing guns the Japanese
were vastly superior, and while the Chinese battleships _Ting Yuen_ and
_Chen Yuen_, each of 7,430 tons, were superior to any of the Japanese
warships, the three largest of which were each of 4,277 tons, the gross
tonnage of the Japanese fleet was 36,000 to 21,000 of the Chinese.
During the progress of the battle the ships engaged on each side
numbered an even dozen, but at the very start, before a decisive shot
was fired by either contestant, the _Tsi Yuen_, 2,355 tons, and _Kwan
Chiae_, 1,300 tons, ran away, and before they had time to get into the
game the _Chao Yung_ and _Yang Wei_ were in flames and had fled to the
nearest land. So the battle was fought by eight Chinese ships against
twelve of the Japanese. Of the Chinese vessels, the flagship, commanded
by Admiral Ting, and her sister ship, which immediately after the
beginning of the fight was for four hours commanded by McGiffin, were
the two chief aggressors, and in consequence received the fire of the
entire Japanese squadron. Toward the end of the fight, which without
interruption lasted for five long hours, the Japanese did not even
consider the four smaller ships of the enemy, but, sailing around the
two ironclads in a circle, fired only at them. The Japanese themselves
testified that these two ships never lost their formation, and that
when her sister ironclad was closely pressed the _Chen Yuen_, by her
movements and gun practice, protected the _Ting Yuen_, and, in fact,
while she could not prevent the heavy loss the fleet encountered,
preserved it from annihilation. During the fight this ship was almost
continuously on fire, and was struck by every kind of projectile, from
the thirteen-inch Canet shells to a rifle bullet, four hundred times.
McGiffin himself was so badly wounded, so beaten about by concussions,
so burned, and so bruised by steel splinters, that his health and
eyesight were forever wrecked. But he brought the _Chen Yuen_ safely
into Port Arthur and the remnants of the fleet with her.

On account of his lack of health he resigned from the Chinese service
and returned to America. For two years he lived in New York City,
suffering in body without cessation the most exquisite torture. During
that time his letters to his family show only tremendous courage. On the
splintered, gaping deck of the _Chen Yuen_, with the fires below it,
and the shells bursting upon it, he had shown to his Chinese crew the
courage of the white man who knew he was responsible for them and for
the honor of their country. But far greater and more difficult was the
courage he showed while alone in the dark sick-room, and in the private
wards of the hospitals.

In the letters he dictates from there he still is concerned only lest
those at home shall "worry"; he reassures them with falsehoods, jokes
at their fears; of the people he can see from the window of the hospital
tells them foolish stories; for a little boy who has been kind he asks
them to send him his Chinese postage stamps; he plans a trip he will
take with them when he is stronger, knowing he never will be stronger.
The doctors had urged upon him a certain operation, and of it to a
friend he wrote: "I know that I will have to have a piece about three
inches square cut out of my skull, and this nerve cut off near the
middle of the brain, as well as my eye taken out (for a couple of hours
only, provided it is not mislaid, and can be found). Doctor ------ and
his crowd show a bad memory for failures. As a result of this operation
others have told me--I forget the percentage of deaths, which does not
matter, but--that a large percentage have become insane. And some lost
their sight."

While threatened with insanity and complete blindness, and hourly from
his wounds suffering a pain drugs could not master, he dictated for the
_Century Magazine_ the only complete account of the battle of the Yalu.
In a letter to Mr. Richard Watson Gilder he writes: "...my eyes are
troubling me. I cannot see even what I am writing now, and am getting
the article under difficulties. I yet hope to place it in your hands by
the 21st, still, if my eyes grow worse------"

"Still, if my eyes grow worse------"

The unfinished sentence was grimly prophetic.

Unknown to his attendants at the hospital, among the papers in his
despatch-box he had secreted his service revolver. On the morning of the
11th of February, 1897, he asked for this box, and on some pretext sent
the nurse from the room. When the report of the pistol brought them
running to his bedside, they found the pain-driven body at peace, and
the tired eyes dark forever.

In the article in the _Century_ on the battle of the Yalu, he had said:

"Chief among those who have died for their country is Admiral Ting Ju
Chang, a gallant soldier and true gentleman. Betrayed by his countrymen,
fighting against odds, almost his last official act was to stipulate
for the lives of his officers and men. His own he scorned to save, well
knowing that his ungrateful country would prove less merciful than his
honorable foe. Bitter, indeed, must have been the reflections of the
old, wounded hero, in that midnight hour, as he drank the poisoned cup
that was to give him rest."

And bitter indeed must have been the reflections of the young wounded
American, robbed, by the parsimony of his country, of the right he had
earned to serve it, and who was driven out to give his best years and
his life for a strange people under a strange flag.




GENERAL WILLIAM WALKER,

THE KING OF THE FILIBUSTERS

IT is safe to say that to members of the younger generation the name of
William Walker conveys absolutely nothing. To them, as a name, "William
Walker" awakens no pride of race or country. It certainly does not
suggest poetry and adventure. To obtain a place in even this group
of Soldiers of Fortune, William Walker, the most distinguished of all
American Soldiers of Fortune, the one who but for his own countrymen
would have single-handed attained the most far-reaching results, had to
wait his turn behind adventurers of other lands and boy officers of
his own. And yet had this man with the plain name, the name that
to-day means nothing, accomplished what he adventured, he would on this
continent have solved the problem of slavery, have established an empire
in Mexico and in Central America, and, incidentally, have brought us
into war with all of Europe. That is all he would have accomplished.

In the days of gold in San Francisco among the "Forty-niners" William
Walker was one of the most famous, most picturesque and popular figures.
Jack Oakhurst, gambler; Colonel Starbottle, duellist; Yuba Bill,
stage-coach driver, were his contemporaries. Bret Harte was one of his
keenest admirers, and in two of his stories, thinly disguised under a
more appealing name, Walker is the hero. When, later, Walker came to New
York City, in his honor Broadway from the Battery to Madison Square was
bedecked with flags and arches. "It was roses, roses all the way." The
house-tops rocked and swayed.

In New Orleans, where in a box at the opera he made his first
appearance, for ten minutes the performance came to a pause, while the
audience stood to salute him.

This happened less than fifty years ago, and there are men who as boys
were out with "Walker of Nicaragua," and who are still active in the
public life of San Francisco and New York.

Walker was born in 1824, in Nashville, Tenn. He was the oldest son of
a Scotch banker, a man of a deeply religious mind, and interested in
a business which certainly is removed, as far as possible, from
the profession of arms. Indeed, few men better than William Walker
illustrate the fact that great generals are born, not trained.
Everything in Walker's birth, family tradition, and education pointed
to his becoming a member of one of the "learned" professions. It was
the wish of his father that he should be a minister of the Presbyterian
Church, and as a child he was trained with that end in view. He himself
preferred to study medicine, and after graduating at the University of
Tennessee, at Edinburgh he followed a course of lectures, and for two
years travelled in Europe, visiting many of the great hospitals.

Then having thoroughly equipped himself to practise as a physician,
after a brief return to his native city, and as short a stay in
Philadelphia, he took down his shingle forever, and proceeded to
New Orleans to study law. In two years he was admitted to the bar of
Louisiana. But because clients were few, or because the red tape of the
law chafed his spirit, within a year, as already he had abandoned
the Church and Medicine, he abandoned his law practice and became
an editorial writer on the New Orleans _Crescent_. A year later the
restlessness which had rebelled against the grave professions led him to
the gold fields of California, and San Francisco. There, in 1852, at
the age of only twenty-eight, as editor of the San Francisco _Herald_,
Walker began his real life which so soon was to end in both disaster and
glory.

Up to his twenty-eighth year, except in his restlessness, nothing in his
life foreshadowed what was to follow. Nothing pointed to him as a man
for whom thousands of other men, from every capital of the world, would
give up their lives.

Negatively, by abandoning three separate callings, and in making it
plain that a professional career did not appeal to him, Walker had
thrown a certain sidelight on his character; but actively he never had
given any hint that under the thoughtful brow of the young doctor and
lawyer there was a mind evolving schemes of empire, and an ambition
limited only by the two great oceans.

Walker's first adventure was undoubtedly inspired by and in imitation
of one which at the time of his arrival in San Francisco had just been
brought to a disastrous end. This was the De Boulbon expedition into
Mexico. The Count Gaston Raoulx de Raousset-Boulbon was a young French
nobleman and Soldier of Fortune, a _chasseur d'Afrique_, a duellist,
journalist, dreamer, who came to California to dig gold. Baron
Harden-Hickey, who was born in San Francisco a few years after Boulbon
at the age of thirty was shot in Mexico, also was inspired to dreams of
conquest by this same gentleman adventurer.

Boulbon was a young man of large ideas. In the rapid growth of
California he saw a threat to Mexico and proposed to that government, as
a "buffer" state between the two republics, to form a French colony
in the Mexican State of Sonora. Sonora is that part of Mexico which
directly joins on the south with our State of Arizona. The President of
Mexico gave Boulbon permission to attempt this, and in 1852 he landed at
Guaymas in the Gulf of California with two hundred and sixty well-armed
Frenchmen. The ostensible excuse of Boulbon for thus invading foreign
soil was his contract with the President under which his "emigrants"
were hired to protect other foreigners working in the "Restauradora"
mines from the attacks of Apache Indians from our own Arizona. But there
is evidence that back of Boulbon was the French Government, and that
he was attempting, in his small way, what later was attempted by
Maximilian, backed by a French army corps and Louis Napoleon, to
establish in Mexico an empire under French protection. For both the
filibuster and the emperor the end was the same; to be shot by the
fusillade against a church wall.

In 1852, two years before Boulbon's death, which was the finale to his
second filibustering expedition into Sonora, he wrote to a friend in
Paris: "Europeans are disturbed by the growth of the United States. And
rightly so. Unless she be dismembered; unless a powerful rival be built
up beside her (_i.e._, France in Mexico), America will become, through
her commerce, her trade, her population, her geographical position upon
two oceans, the inevitable mistress of the world. In ten years Europe
dare not fire a shot without her permission. As I write fifty Americans
prepare to sail for Mexico and go perhaps to victory. _Voila les
Etats-Unis_."

These fifty Americans who, in the eyes of Boulbon, threatened the peace
of Europe, were led by the ex-doctor, ex-lawyer, ex-editor, William
Walker, _aged twenty-eight years_. Walker had attempted but had failed
to obtain from the Mexican Government such a contract as the one it had
granted De Boulbon. He accordingly sailed without it, announcing that,
whether the Mexican Government asked him to do so or not, he would see
that the women and children on the border of Mexico and Arizona were
protected from massacre by the Indians. It will be remembered that when
Dr. Jameson raided the Transvaal he also went to protect "women and
children" from massacre by the Boers. Walker's explanation of his
expedition, in his own words, is as follows. He writes in the third
person: "What Walker saw and heard satisfied him that a comparatively
small body of Americans might gain a position on the Sonora frontier
and protect the families on the border from the Indians, and such an
act would be one of humanity whether or not sanctioned by the Mexican
Government. The condition of the upper part of Sonora was at that time,
and still is [he was writing eight years later, in 1860], a disgrace to
the civilization of the continent...and the people of the United States
were more immediately responsible before the world for the Apache
outrages. Northern Sonora was in fact, more under the dominion of the
Apaches than under the laws of Mexico, and the contributions of the
Indians were collected with greater regularity and certainty than the
dues of the tax-gatherers. The state of this region furnished the best
defence for any American aiming to settle there without the formal
consent of Mexico; and, although political changes would certainly have
followed the establishment of a colony, they might be justified by the
plea that any social organization, no matter how secured, is preferable
to that in which individuals and families are altogether at the mercy of
savages."

While at the time of Jameson's raid the women and children in danger of
massacre from the Boers were as many as there are snakes in Ireland, at
the time of Walker's raid the women and children were in danger from the
Indians, who as enemies, as Walker soon discovered, were as cruel and as
greatly to be feared as he had described them.

But it was not to save women and children that Walker sought to conquer
the State of Sonora. At the time of his expedition the great question of
slavery was acute; and if in the States next to be admitted to the Union
slavery was to be prohibited, the time had come, so it seemed to
this statesman of twenty-eight years, when the South must extend her
boundaries, and for her slaves find an outlet in fresh territory.
Sonora already joined Arizona. By conquest her territory could easily
be extended to meet Texas. As a matter of fact, strategically the spot
selected by William Walker for the purpose for which he desired it was
almost perfect. Throughout his brief career one must remember that the
spring of all his acts was this dream of an empire where slavery would
be recognized. His mother was a slave-holder. In Tennessee he had been
born and bred surrounded by slaves. His youth and manhood had been spent
in Nashville and New Orleans. He believed as honestly, as fanatically
in the right to hold slaves as did his father in the faith of the
Covenanters. To-day one reads his arguments in favor of slavery with the
most curious interest. His appeal to the humanity of his reader, to his
heart, to his sense of justice, to his fear of God, and to his belief
in the Holy Bible not to abolish slavery, but to continue it, to this
generation is as amusing as the topsy-turvyisms of Gilbert or Shaw. But
to the young man himself slavery was a sacred institution, intended for
the betterment of mankind, a God-given benefit to the black man and a
God-given right of his white master.

White brothers in the South, with perhaps less exalted motives,
contributed funds to fit out Walker's expedition, and in October, 1852,
with forty-five men, he landed at Cape St. Lucas, at the extreme point
of Lower California. Lower California, it must be remembered, in spite
of its name, is not a part of our California, but then was, and still
is, a part of Mexico. The fact that he was at last upon the soil of the
enemy caused Walker to throw off all pretence; and instead of hastening
to protect women and children, he sailed a few miles farther up the
coast to La Paz. With his forty-five followers he raided the town, made
the Governor a prisoner, and established a republic with himself as
President. In a proclamation he declared the people free of the tyranny
of Mexico. They had no desire to be free, but Walker was determined,
and, whether they liked it or not, they woke up to find themselves an
independent republic. A few weeks later, although he had not yet set
foot there, Walker annexed on paper the State of Sonora, and to both
States gave the name of the Republic of Sonora.

As soon as word of this reached San Francisco, his friends busied
themselves in his behalf, and the danger-loving and adventurous of
all lands were enlisted as "emigrants" and shipped to him in the bark
_Anita_.

Two months later, in November, 1852, three hundred of these joined
Walker. They were as desperate a band of scoundrels as ever robbed a
sluice, stoned a Chinaman, or shot a "Greaser." When they found that to
command them there was only a boy, they plotted to blow up the
magazine in which the powder was stored, rob the camp, and march north,
supporting themselves by looting the ranches. Walker learned of their
plot, tried the ringleaders by court-martial, and shot them. With a
force as absolutely undisciplined as was his, the act required the most
complete personal courage. That was a quality the men with him could
fully appreciate. They saw they had as a leader one who could fight,
and one who would punish. The majority did not want a leader who would
punish so when Walker called upon those who would follow him to Sonora
to show their hands, only the original forty-five and about forty of
the later recruits remained with him. With less than one hundred men
he started to march up the Peninsula through Lower California, and so
around the Gulf to Sonora.

From the very start the filibusters were overwhelmed with disaster. The
Mexicans, with Indian allies, skulked on the flanks and rear. Men who
in the almost daily encounters were killed fell into the hands of the
Indians, and their bodies were mutilated. Stragglers and deserters were
run to earth and tortured. Those of the filibusters who were wounded
died from lack of medical care. The only instruments they possessed with
which to extract the arrow-heads were probes made from ramrods filed to
a point. Their only food was the cattle they killed on the march. The
army was barefoot, the Cabinet in rags, the President of Sonora wore one
boot and one shoe.

Unable to proceed farther, Walker fell back upon San Vincente, where he
had left the arms and ammunition of the deserters and a rear-guard of
eighteen men. He found not one of these to welcome him. A dozen had
deserted, and the Mexicans had surprised the rest, lassoing them and
torturing them until they died. Walker now had but thirty-five men. To
wait for further re-enforcements from San Francisco, even were he sure
that re-enforcements would come, was impossible. He determined by forced
marches to fight his way to the boundary line of California. Between him
and safety were the Mexican soldiers holding the passes, and the Indians
hiding on his flanks. When within three miles of the boundary line, at
San Diego, Colonel Melendrez, who commanded the Mexican forces, sent in
a flag of truce, and offered, if they would surrender, a safe-conduct to
all of the survivors of the expedition except the chief. But the men who
for one year had fought and starved for Walker, would not, within three
miles of home, abandon him.

Melendrez then begged the commander of the United States troops to order
Walker to surrender. Major McKinstry, who was in command of the United
States Army Post at San Diego, refused. For him to cross the line would
be a violation of neutral territory. On Mexican soil he would neither
embarrass the ex-President of Sonora nor aid him; but he saw to it that
if the filibusters reached American soil, no Mexican or Indian should
follow them.

Accordingly, on the imaginary boundary he drew up his troop, and like
an impartial umpire awaited the result. Hidden behind rocks and cactus,
across the hot, glaring plain, the filibusters could see the American
flag, and the gay, fluttering guidons of the cavalry. The sight gave
them heart for one last desperate spurt. Melendrez also appreciated
that for the final attack the moment had come. As he charged, Walker,
apparently routed, fled, but concealed in the rocks behind him he had
stationed a rear-guard of a dozen men. As Melendrez rode into this
ambush the dozen riflemen emptied as many saddles, and the Mexicans and
Indians stampeded. A half hour later, footsore and famished, the little
band that had set forth to found an empire of slaves, staggered across
the line and surrendered to the forces of the United States.

Of this expedition James Jeffrey Roche says, in his "Byways of War,"
which is of all books published about Walker the most intensely and
fascinatingly interesting and complete: "Years afterward the peon
herdsman or prowling Cocupa Indian in the mountain by-paths stumbled
over the bleaching skeleton of some nameless one whose resting-place was
marked by no cross or cairn, but the Colts revolver resting beside
his bones spoke his country and his occupation--the only relic of the
would-be conquistadores of the nineteenth century."

Under parole to report to General Wood, commanding the Department of the
Pacific, the filibusters were sent by sailing vessel to San Francisco,
where their leader was tried for violating the neutrality laws of the
United States, and acquitted.

Walker's first expedition had ended in failure, but for him it had been
an opportunity of tremendous experience, as active service is the best
of all military academies, and for the kind of warfare he was to wage,
the best preparation. Nor was it inglorious, for his fellow survivors,
contrary to the usual practice, instead of in bar-rooms placing the
blame for failure upon their leader, stood ready to fight one and all
who doubted his ability or his courage. Later, after five years, many of
these same men, though ten to twenty years his senior, followed him to
death, and never questioned his judgment nor his right to command.

At this time in Nicaragua there was the usual revolution. On the
south the sister republic of Costa Rica was taking sides, on the north
Honduras was landing arms and men. There was no law, no government. A
dozen political parties, a dozen commanding generals, and not one strong
man.

In the editorial rooms of the San Francisco _Herald_, Walker, searching
the map for new worlds to conquer, rested his finger upon Nicaragua.

In its confusion of authority he saw an opportunity to make himself
a power, and in its tropical wealth and beauty, in the laziness and
incompetence of its inhabitants, he beheld a greater, fairer, more kind
Sonora. On the Pacific side from San Francisco he could re-enforce his
army with men and arms; on the Caribbean side from New Orleans he could,
when the moment arrived, people his empire with slaves.

The two parties at war in Nicaragua were the Legitimists and the
Democrats. Why they were at war it is not necessary to know. Probably
Walker did not know; it is not likely that they themselves knew. But
from the leader of the Democrats Walker obtained a contract to bring
to Nicaragua three hundred Americans, who were each to receive several
hundred acres of land, and who were described as "colonists liable to
military duty." This contract Walker submitted to the Attorney-General
of the State and to General Wood, who once before had acquitted him of
filibustering; and neither of these Federal officers saw anything
which seemed to give them the right to interfere. But the rest of San
Francisco was less credulous, and the "colonists" who joined Walker
had a very distinct idea that they were not going to Nicaragua to plant
coffee or to pick bananas.

In May, 1855, just a year after Walker and his thirty-three followers
had surrendered to the United States troops at San Diego, with fifty new
recruits and seven veterans of the former expedition he sailed from
San Francisco in the brig _Vesta_, and in five weeks, after a weary and
stormy voyage, landed at Realejo. There he was met by representatives of
the Provisional Director of the Democrats, who received the Californians
warmly.

Walker was commissioned a colonel, Achilles Kewen, who had been fighting
under Lopez in Cuba, a lieutenant-colonel, and Timothy Crocker, who had
served under Walker in the Sonora expedition, a major. The corps
was organized as an independent command and was named "La Falange
Americana." At this time the enemy held the route to the Caribbean, and
Walker's first orders were to dislodge him.

Accordingly, a week after landing with his fifty-seven Americans and one
hundred and fifty native troops, Walker sailed in the _Vesta_ for Brito,
from which port he marched upon Rivas, a city of eleven thousand people
and garrisoned by some twelve hundred of the enemy.

The first fight ended in a complete and disastrous fiasco. The native
troops ran away, and the Americans surrounded by six hundred of the
Legitimists' soldiers, after defending themselves for three hours behind
some adobe huts, charged the enemy and escaped into the jungle. Their
loss was heavy, and among the killed were the two men upon whom Walker
chiefly depended: Kewen and Crocker. The Legitimists placed the bodies
of the dead and wounded who were still living on a pile of logs and
burned them. After a painful night march, Walker, the next day, reached
San Juan on the coast, and, finding a Costa Rican schooner in port,
seized it for his use. At this moment, although Walker's men were
defeated, bleeding, and in open flight, two "gringos" picked up on
the beach of San Juan, "the Texan Harry McLeod and the Irishman Peter
Burns," asked to be permitted to join him.

"It was encouraging," Walker writes, "for the soldiers to find that
some besides themselves did not regard their fortunes as altogether
desperate, and small as was this addition to their number it gave
increased moral as well as material strength to the command."

Sometimes in reading history it would appear as though for success the
first requisite must be an utter lack of humor, and inability to look
upon what one is attempting except with absolute seriousness. With forty
men Walker was planning to conquer and rule Nicaragua, a country with a
population of two hundred and fifty thousand souls and as large as the
combined area of Massachusetts, Vermont, Rhode Island, New Hampshire,
and Connecticut. And yet, even seven years later, he records without
a smile that two beach-combers gave his army "moral and material
strength." And it is most characteristic of the man that at the
moment he was rejoicing over this addition to his forces, to maintain
discipline two Americans who had set fire to the houses of the enemy
he ordered to be shot. A weaker man would have repudiated the two
Americans, who, in fact, were not members of the Phalanx, and trusted
that their crimes would not be charged against him. But the success of
Walker lay greatly in his stern discipline. He tried the men, and they
confessed to their guilt. One got away; and, as it might appear that
Walker had connived at his escape, to the second man was shown no
mercy. When one reads how severe was Walker in his punishments, and
how frequently the death penalty was invoked by him against his own
few followers, the wonder grows that these men, as independent and as
unaccustomed to restraint as were those who first joined him, submitted
to his leadership. One can explain it only by the personal quality of
Walker himself.

Among these reckless, fearless outlaws, who, despising their allies,
believed and proved that with his rifle one American could account for a
dozen Nicaraguans, Walker was the one man who did not boast or drink or
gamble, who did not even swear, who never looked at a woman, and who, in
money matters, was scrupulously honest and unself-seeking. In a fight,
his followers knew that for them he would risk being shot just as
unconcernedly as to maintain his authority he would shoot one of them.

Treachery, cowardice, looting, any indignity to women, he punished with
death; but to the wounded, either of his own or of the enemy's forces,
he was as gentle as a nursing sister and the brave and able he rewarded
with instant promotion and higher pay. In no one trait was he a
demagogue. One can find no effort on his part to ingratiate himself with
his men. Among the officers of his staff there were no favorites. He
messed alone, and at all times kept to himself. He spoke little, and
then with utter lack of self-consciousness. In the face of injustice,
perjury, or physical danger, he was always calm, firm, dispassionate.
But it is said that on those infrequent occasions when his anger
asserted itself, the steady steel-gray eyes flashed so menacingly that
those who faced them would as soon look down the barrel of his Colt.

The impression one gets of him gathered from his recorded acts, from his
own writings, from the writings of those who fought with him, is of a
silent, student-like young man believing religiously in his "star of
destiny"; but, in all matters that did not concern himself, possessed of
a grim sense of fun. The sayings of his men that in his history of the
war he records, show a distinct appreciation of the Bret Harte school of
humor. As, for instance, when he tells how he wished to make one of them
a drummer boy and the Californian drawled: "No, thanks, colonel; I never
seen a picture of a battle yet that the first thing in it wasn't a dead
drummer boy with a busted drum."

In Walker the personal vanity which is so characteristic of the soldier
of fortune was utterly lacking. In a land where a captain bedecks
himself like a field-marshal, Walker wore his trousers stuffed in his
boots, a civilian's blue frock-coat, and the slouch hat of the period,
with, for his only ornament, the red ribbon of the Democrats. The
authority he wielded did not depend upon braid or buttons, and only when
going into battle did he wear his sword. In appearance he was slightly
built, rather below the medium height, smooth shaven, and with deep-set
gray eyes. These eyes apparently, as they gave him his nickname, were
his most marked feature.

His followers called him, and later, when he was thirty-two years
old, he was known all over the United States as the "Gray-Eyed Man of
Destiny."

From the first Walker recognized that in order to establish himself in
Nicaragua he must keep in touch with all possible recruits arriving from
San Francisco and New York, and that to do this he must hold the line
of transit from the Caribbean Sea to the Pacific. At this time the sea
routes to the gold-fields were three: by sailing vessel around the Cape,
one over the Isthmus of Panama, and one, which was the shortest, across
Nicaragua. By a charter from the Government of Nicaragua, the right to
transport passengers across this isthmus was controlled by the Accessory
Transit Company, of which the first Cornelius Vanderbilt was president.
His company owned a line of ocean steamers both on the Pacific side
and on the Atlantic side. Passengers _en route_ from New York to the
gold-fields were landed by these latter steamers at Greytown on the west
coast of Nicaragua, and sent by boats of light draught up the San Juan
River to Lake Nicaragua. There they were met by larger lake steamers and
conveyed across the lake to Virgin Bay. From that point, in carriages
and on mule back, they were carried twelve miles overland to the port of
San Juan del Sud on the Pacific Coast, where they boarded the company's
steamers to San Francisco.

During the year of Walker's occupation the number of passengers crossing
Nicaragua was an average of about two thousand a month.

It was to control this route that immediately after his first defeat
Walker returned to San Juan del Sud, and in a smart skirmish defeated
the enemy and secured possession of Virgin Bay, the halting place for
the passengers going east or west. In this fight Walker was outnumbered
five to one, but his losses were only three natives killed and a few
Americans wounded. The Legitimists lost sixty killed and a hundred
wounded. This proportion of losses shows how fatally effective was the
rifle and revolver fire of the Californians. Indeed, so wonderful was it
that when some years ago I visited the towns and cities captured by the
filibusters, I found that the marksmanship of Walker's Phalanx was still
a tradition. Indeed, thanks to the filibusters, to-day in any part of
Central America a man from the States, if in trouble, has only to show
his gun. No native will wait for him to fire it.

After the fight at Virgin Bay, Walker received from California fifty
recruits--a very welcome addition to his force, and as he now commanded
about one hundred and twenty Americans, three hundred Nicaraguans, under
a friendly native, General Valle, and two brass cannon, he decided to
again attack Rivas. Rivas is on the lake just above Virgin Bay; still
further up is Granada, which was the head-quarters of the Legitimists.

Fearing Walker's attack upon Rivas, the Legitimist troops were hurried
south from Granada to that city, leaving Granada but slightly protected.

Through intercepted letters Walker learned of this and determined to
strike at Granada. By night, in one of the lake steamers, he skirted the
shore, and just before daybreak, with fires banked and all lights out,
drew up to a point near the city. The day previous the Legitimists had
gained a victory, and, as good luck or Walker's "destiny" would have
it, the night before Granada had been celebrating the event. Much joyous
dancing and much drinking of aguardiente had buried the inhabitants in a
drugged slumber. The garrison slept, the sentries slept, the city slept.
But when the convent bells called for early mass, the air was shaken
with sharp reports that to the ears of the Legitimists were unfamiliar
and disquieting. They were not the loud explosions of their own muskets
nor of the smooth bores of the Democrats. The sounds were sharp and
cruel like the crack of a whip. The sentries flying from their posts
disclosed the terrifying truth. "The Filibusteros!" they cried.
Following them at a gallop came Walker and Valle and behind them the men
of the awful Phalanx, whom already the natives had learned to fear: the
bearded giants in red flannel shirts who at Rivas on foot had charged
the artillery with revolvers, who at Virgin Bay when wounded had drawn
from their boots glittering bowie knives and hurled them like arrows,
who at all times shot with the accuracy of the hawk falling upon a
squawking hen.

There was a brief terrified stand in the Plaza, and then a complete
rout. As was their custom, the native Democrats began at once to loot
the city. But Walker put his sword into the first one of these he met,
and ordered the Americans to arrest all others found stealing, and to
return the goods already stolen. Over a hundred political prisoners in
the cartel were released by Walker, and the ball and chain to which each
was fastened stricken off. More than two-thirds of them at once enlisted
under Walker's banner.

He now was in a position to dictate to the enemy his own terms of peace,
but a fatal blunder on the part of Parker H. French, a lieutenant of
Walker's, postponed peace for several weeks, and led to unfortunate
reprisals. French had made an unauthorized and unsuccessful assault
on San Carlos at the eastern end of the lake, and the Legitimists
retaliated at Virgin Bay by killing half a dozen peaceful passengers,
and at San Carlos by firing at a transit steamer. For this the excuse of
the Legitimists was, that now that Walker was using the lake steamers
as transports it was impossible for them to know whether the boats were
occupied by his men or neutral passengers. As he could not reach the
guilty ones, Walker held responsible for their acts their secretary
of state, who at the taking of Granada was among the prisoners. He was
tried by court-martial and shot, "a victim of the new interpretation of
the principles of constitutional government." While this act of Walker's
was certainly stretching the theory of responsibility to the breaking
point, its immediate effect was to bring about a hasty surrender and a
meeting between the generals of the two political parties. Thus, four
months after Walker and his fifty-seven followers landed in Nicaragua,
a suspension of hostilities was arranged, and the side for which the
Americans had fought was in power. Walker was made commander-in-chief
of an army of twelve hundred men with salary of six thousand dollars a
year. A man named Rivas was appointed temporary president.

To Walker this pause in the fight was most welcome. It gave him an
opportunity to enlist recruits and to organize his men for the better
accomplishment of what was the real object of his going to Nicaragua. He
now had under him a remarkable force, one of the most effective known
to military history. For although six months had not yet passed,
the organization he now commanded was as unlike the Phalanx of
the fifty-eight adventurers who were driven back at Rivas, as were
Falstaff's followers from the regiment of picked men commanded by
Colonel Roosevelt. Instead of the undisciplined and lawless now being
in the majority, the ranks were filled with the pick of the California
mining camps, with veterans of the Mexican War, with young Southerners
of birth and spirit, and with soldiers of fortune from all of the great
armies of Europe.

In the Civil War, which so soon followed, and later in the service of
the Khedive of Egypt, were several of Walker's officers, and for years
after his death there was no war in which one of the men trained by him
in the jungles of Nicaragua did not distinguish himself. In his memoirs,
the Englishman, General Charles Frederic Henningsen, writes that though
he had taken part in some of the greatest battles of the Civil War he
would pit a thousand men of Walker's command against any five thousand
Confederate or Union soldiers. And General Henningsen was one who spoke
with authority. Before he joined Walker he had served in Spain under Don
Carlos, in Hungary under Kossuth, and in Bulgaria.

Of Walker's men, a regiment of which he commanded, he writes: "I often
have seen them march with a broken or compound fractured arm in
splints, and using the other to fire the rifle or revolver. Those with a
fractured thigh or wounds which rendered them incapable of removal, shot
themselves. Such men do not turn up in the average of everyday life, nor
do I ever expect to see their like again. All military science failed
on a suddenly given field before such assailants, who came at a run
to close with their revolvers and who thought little of charging a gun
battery, pistol in hand."

Another graduate of Walker's army was Captain Fred Townsend Ward, a
native of Salem, Mass., who after the death of Walker organized and
led the ever victorious army that put down the Tai-Ping rebellion,
and performed the many feats of martial glory for which Chinese Gordon
received the credit. In Shanghai, to the memory of the filibuster, there
are to-day two temples in his honor.

Joaquin Miller, the poet, miner, and soldier, who but recently was a
picturesque figure on the hotel porch at Saratoga Springs, was one of
the young Californians who was "out with Walker," and who later in
his career by his verse helped to preserve the name of his beloved
commander. I. C. Jamison, living to-day in Guthrie, Oklahoma, was a
captain under Walker. When war again came, as it did within four months,
these were the men who made Walker President of Nicaragua.

During the four months in all but title he had been president, and as
such he was recognized and feared. It was against him, not Rivas, that
in February, 1856, the neighboring republic of Costa Rica declared war.
For three months this war continued with varying fortunes until the
Costa Ricans were driven across the border.

In June of the same year Rivas called a general election for president,
announcing himself as the candidate of the Democrats. Two other
Democrats also presented themselves, Salazar and Ferrer. The
Legitimists, recognizing in their former enemy the real ruler of the
country, nominated Walker. By an overwhelming majority he was elected,
receiving 15,835 votes to 867 cast for Rivas. Salazar received 2,087;
Ferrer, 4,447.

Walker now was the legal as well as the actual ruler of the country,
and at no time in its history, as during Walker's administration, was
Nicaragua governed so justly, so wisely, and so well. But in his success
the neighboring republics saw a menace to their own independence. To the
four other republics of Central America the five-pointed blood-red star
on the flag of the filibusters bore a sinister motto: "Five or None."
The meaning was only too unpleasantly obvious. At once, Costa Rica on
the south, and Guatemala, Salvador, and Honduras from the north, with
the malcontents of Nicaragua, declared war against the foreign invader.
Again Walker was in the field with opposed to him 21,000 of the allies.
The strength of his own force varied. On his election as president the
backbone of his army was a magnificently trained body of veterans to the
number of 2,000. This was later increased to 3,500, but it is doubtful
if at any one time it ever exceeded that number. His muster and hospital
rolls show that during his entire occupation of Nicaragua there were
enlisted, at one time or another, under his banner 10,000 men. While in
his service, of this number, by hostile shots or fever, 5,000 died.

To describe the battles with the allies would be interminable and
wearying. In every particular they are much alike: the long silent
night march, the rush at daybreak, the fight to gain strategic
positions either of the barracks, or of the Cathedral in the Plaza,
the hand-to-hand fighting from behind barricades and adobe walls. The
out-come of these fights sometimes varied, but the final result was
never in doubt, and had no outside influences intervened, in time each
republic in Central America would have come under the five-pointed star.

In Costa Rica there is a marble statue showing that republic represented
as a young woman with her foot upon the neck of Walker. Some night a
truth-loving American will place a can of dynamite at the foot of that
statue, and walk hurriedly away. Unaided, neither Costa Rica nor any
other Central American republic could have driven Walker from her soil.
His downfall came through his own people, and through an act of his
which provoked them.

When Walker was elected president he found that the Accessory Transit
Company had not lived up to the terms of its concession with the
Nicaraguan Government. His efforts to hold it to the terms of its
concession led to his overthrow. By its charter the Transit Company
agreed to pay to Nicaragua ten thousand dollars annually and ten per
cent. of the net profits; but the company, whose history the United
States Minister, Squire, characterized as "an infamous career of
deception and fraud," manipulated its books in such a fashion as to
show that there never were any profits. Doubting this, Walker sent a
commission to New York to investigate. The commission discovered the
fraud and demanded in back payments two hundred and fifty thousand
dollars. When the company refused to pay this, as security for the
debt Walker seized its steamers, wharves, and storehouses, revoked its
charter, and gave a new charter to two of its directors, Morgan and
Garrison, who, in San Francisco, were working against Vanderbilt. In
doing this, while he was legally in the right, he committed a fatal
error. He had made a powerful enemy of Vanderbilt, and he had shut off
his only lines of communication with the United States. For, enraged
at the presumption of the filibuster president, Vanderbilt withdrew his
ocean steamers, thus leaving Walker without men or ammunition, and as
isolated as though upon a deserted island. He possessed Vanderbilt's
boats upon the San Juan River and Nicaragua Lake, but they were of use
to him only locally.

His position was that of a man holding the centre span of a bridge of
which every span on either side of him has been destroyed.

Vanderbilt did not rest at withdrawing his steamers, but by supporting
the Costa Ricans with money and men, carried the war into Central
America. From Washington he fought Walker through Secretary of State
Marcy, who proved a willing tool.

Spencer and Webster, and the other soldiers of fortune employed by
Vanderbilt, closed the route on the Caribbean side, and the man-of-war
_St. Marys_, commanded by Captain Davis, was ordered to San Juan on the
Pacific side. The instructions given to Captain Davis were to aid the
allies in forcing Walker out of Nicaragua. Walker claims that these
orders were given to Marcy by Vanderbilt and by Marcy to Commodore
Mervin, who was Marcy's personal friend and who issued them to Davis.
Davis claims that he acted only in the interest of humanity to save
Walker in spite of himself. In any event, the result was the same.
Walker, his force cut down by hostile shot and fever and desertion, took
refuge in Rivas, where he was besieged by the allied armies. There was
no bread in the city. The men were living on horse and mule meat. There
was no salt. The hospital was filled with wounded and those stricken
with fever.

Captain Davis, in the name of humanity, demanded Walker's surrender to
the United States. Walker told him he would not surrender, but that
if the time came when he found he must fly, he would do so in his own
little schooner of war, the _Granada_, which constituted his entire
navy, and in her, as a free man, take his forces where he pleased. Then
Davis informed Walker that the force Walker had sent to recapture the
Greytown route had been defeated by the janizaries of Vanderbilt; that
the steamers from San Francisco, on which Walker now counted to bring
him re-enforcements, had also been taken off the line, and finally
that it was his "unalterable and deliberate intention" to seize the
_Granada_. On this point his orders left him no choice. The _Granada_
was the last means of transportation still left to Walker. He had hoped
to make a sortie and on board her to escape from the country. But with
his ship taken from him and no longer able to sustain the siege of
the allies, he surrendered to the forces of the United States. In the
agreement drawn up by him and Davis, Walker provided for the care, by
Davis, of the sick and wounded, for the protection after his departure
of the natives who had fought with him, and for the transportation of
himself and officers to the United States.

On his arrival in New York he received a welcome such as later was
extended to Kossuth, and, in our own day, to Admiral Dewey. The city
was decorated with flags and arches; and banquets, fetes, and public
meetings were everywhere held in his honor. Walker received these
demonstrations modestly, and on every public occasion announced his
determination to return to the country of which he was the president,
and from which by force he had been driven. At Washington, where he
went to present his claims, he received scant encouragement. His protest
against Captain Davis was referred to Congress, where it was allowed to
die.

Within a month Walker organized an expedition with which to regain his
rights in Nicaragua, and as, in his new constitution for that country,
he had annulled the old law abolishing slavery, among the slave-holders
of the South he found enough money and recruits to enable him to at once
leave the United States. With one hundred and fifty men he sailed from
New Orleans and landed at San del Norte on the Caribbean side. While he
formed a camp on the harbor of San Juan, one of his officers, with fifty
men, proceeded up the river and, capturing the town of Castillo Viejo
and four of the Transit steamers, was in a fair way to obtain possession
of the entire route. At this moment upon the scene arrived the United
States frigate _Wabash_ and Hiram Paulding, who landed a force of three
hundred and fifty blue-jackets with howitzers, and turned the guns of
his frigate upon the camp of the President of Nicaragua. Captain Engel,
who presented the terms of surrender to Walker, said to him: "General,
I am sorry to see you here. A man like you is worthy to command better
men." To which Walker replied grimly: "If I had a third the number you
have brought against me, I would show you which of us two commands the
better men."

For the third time in his history Walker surrendered to the armed forces
of his own country.

On his arrival in the United States, in fulfilment of his parole to
Paulding, Walker at once presented himself at Washington a prisoner
of war. But President Buchanan, although Paulding had acted exactly as
Davis had done, refused to support him, and in a message to Congress
declared that that officer had committed a grave error and established
an unsafe precedent.

On the strength of this Walker demanded of the United States Government
indemnity for his losses, and that it should furnish him and his
followers transportation even to the very camp from which its
representatives had torn him. This demand, as Walker foresaw, was not
considered seriously, and with a force of about one hundred men, among
whom were many of his veterans, he again set sail from New Orleans.
Owing to the fact that, to prevent his return, there now were on each
side of the Isthmus both American and British men-of-war, Walker, with
the idea of reaching Nicaragua by land, stopped off at Honduras. In his
war with the allies the Honduranians had been as savage in their attacks
upon his men as even the Costa Ricans, and finding his old enemies
now engaged in a local revolution, on landing, Walker declared for the
weaker side and captured the important seaport of Trujillo. He no sooner
had taken it than the British warship _Icarus_ anchored in the harbor,
and her commanding officer, Captain Salmon, notified Walker that the
British Government held a mortgage on the revenues of the port, and that
to protect the interests of his Government he intended to take the town.
Walker answered that he had made Trujillo a free port, and that Great
Britain's claims no longer existed.

The British officer replied that if Walker surrendered himself and his
men he would carry them as prisoners to the United States, and that if
he did not, he would bombard the town. At this moment General Alvarez,
with seven hundred Honduranians, from the land side surrounded Trujillo,
and prepared to attack. Against such odds by sea and land Walker was
helpless, and he determined to fly. That night, with seventy men,
he left the town and proceeded down the coast toward Nicaragua. The
_Icarus_, having taken on board Alvarez, started in pursuit. The
President of Nicaragua was found in a little Indian fishing village, and
Salmon sent in his shore-boats and demanded his surrender. On leaving
Trujillo, Walker had been forced to abandon all his ammunition save
thirty rounds a man, and all of his food supplies excepting two barrels
of bread. On the coast of this continent there is no spot more unhealthy
than Honduras, and when the Englishmen entered the fishing village they
found Walker's seventy men lying in the palm huts helpless with fever,
and with no stomach to fight British blue-jackets with whom they had no
quarrel. Walker inquired of Salmon if he were asking him to surrender to
the British or to the Honduranian forces, and twice Salmon assured him,
"distinctly and specifically," that he was surrendering to the forces of
her Majesty. With this understanding Walker and his men laid down their
arms and were conveyed to the _Icarus_. But on arriving at Trujillo,
in spite of their protests and demands for trial by a British tribunal,
Salmon turned over his prisoners to the Honduranian general. What excuse
for this is now given by his descendants in the Salmon family I do not
know.

Probably it is a subject they avoid, and, in history, Salmon's version
has never been given, which for him, perhaps, is an injustice. But the
fact remains that he turned over his white brothers to the mercies of
half-Indian, half-negro, savages, who were not allies of Great Britain,
and in whose quarrels she had no interest. And Salmon did this, knowing
there could be but one end. If he did not know it, his stupidity
equalled what now appears to be heartless indifference. So far as to
secure pardon for all except the leader and one faithful follower,
Colonel Rudler of the famous Phalanx, Salmon did use his authority, and
he offered, if Walker would ask as an American citizen, to intercede for
him. But Walker, with a distinct sense of loyalty to the country he had
conquered, and whose people had honored him with their votes, refused to
accept life from the country of his birth, the country that had injured
and repudiated him.

Even in his extremity, abandoned and alone on a strip of glaring coral
and noisome swamp land, surrounded only by his enemies, he remained true
to his ideal.

At thirty-seven life is very sweet, many things still seem possible, and
before him, could his life be spared, Walker beheld greater conquests,
more power, a new South controlling a Nicaragua canal, a network of
busy railroads, great squadrons of merchant vessels, himself emperor of
Central America. On the gunboat the gold-braided youth had but to raise
his hand, and Walker again would be a free man. But the gold-braided one
would render this service only on the condition that Walker would appeal
to him as an American; it was not enough that Walker was a human being.
The condition Walker could not grant.

"The President of Nicaragua," he said, "is a citizen of Nicaragua."

They led him out at sunrise to a level piece of sand along the beach,
and as the priest held the crucifix in front of him he spoke to his
executioners in Spanish, simply and gravely: "I die a Roman Catholic.
In making war upon you at the invitation of the people of Ruatan I
was wrong. Of your people I ask pardon. I accept my punishment with
resignation. I would like to think my death will be for the good of
society."

From a distance of twenty feet three soldiers fired at him, but,
although each shot took effect, Walker was not dead. So, a sergeant
stooped, and with a pistol killed the man who would have made him one of
an empire of slaves.

Had Walker lived four years longer to exhibit upon the great board of
the Civil War his ability as a general, he would, I believe, to-day be
ranked as one of America's greatest fighting men.

And because the people of his own day destroyed him is no reason that we
should withhold from this American, the greatest of all filibusters, the
recognition of his genius.




MAJOR BURNHAM, CHIEF OF SCOUTS

AMONG the Soldiers of Fortune whose stories have been told in this book
were men who are no longer living, men who, to the United States, are
strangers, and men who were of interest chiefly because in what they
attempted they failed.

The subject of this article is none of these. His adventures are as
remarkable as any that ever led a small boy to dig behind the barn for
buried treasure, or stalk Indians in the orchard. But entirely apart
from his adventures he obtains our interest because in what he has
attempted he has not failed, because he is one of our own people, one of
the earliest and best types of American, and because, so far from being
dead and buried, he is at this moment very much alive, and engaged in
Mexico in searching for a buried city. For exercise, he is alternately
chasing, or being chased by, Yaqui Indians.

In his home in Pasadena, Cal., where sometimes he rests quietly for
almost a week at a time, the neighbors know him as "Fred" Burnham. In
England the newspapers crowned him "The King of Scouts." Later, when he
won an official title, they called him "Major Frederick Russell Burnham,
D. S. O."

Some men are born scouts, others by training become scouts. From his
father Burnham inherited his instinct for wood-craft, and to this
instinct, which in him is as keen as in a wild deer or a mountain lion,
he has added, in the jungle and on the prairie and mountain ranges,
years of the hardest, most relentless schooling. In those years he has
trained himself to endure the most appalling fatigues, hunger, thirst,
and wounds; has subdued the brain to infinite patience, has learned to
force every nerve in his body to absolute obedience, to still even the
beating of his heart. Indeed, than Burnham no man of my acquaintance to
my knowledge has devoted himself to his life's work more earnestly, more
honestly, and with such single-mindedness of purpose. To him scouting
is as exact a study as is the piano to Paderewski, with the result that
to-day what the Pole is to other pianists, the American is to all other
"trackers," woodmen, and scouts. He reads "the face of Nature" as you
read your morning paper. To him a movement of his horse's ears is as
plain a warning as the "Go SLOW" of an automobile sign; and he so saves
from ambush an entire troop. In the glitter of a piece of quartz in the
firelight he discovers King Solomon's mines. Like the horned cattle, he
can tell by the smell of it in the air the near presence of water,
and where, glaring in the sun, you can see only a bare kopje, he
distinguishes the muzzle of a pompom, the crown of a Boer sombrero,
the levelled barrel of a Mauser. He is the Sherlock Holmes of all
out-of-doors.

Besides being a scout, he is soldier, hunter, mining expert, and
explorer. Within the last ten years the educated instinct that as a
younger man taught him to follow the trail of an Indian, or the "spoor"
of the Kaffir and the trek wagon, now leads him as a mining expert to
the hiding-places of copper, silver, and gold, and, as he advises, great
and wealthy syndicates buy or refuse tracts of land in Africa and Mexico
as large as the State of New York. As an explorer in the last few years
in the course of his expeditions into undiscovered lands, he has added
to this little world many thousands of square miles.

Personally, Burnham is as unlike the scout of fiction, and of the Wild
West Show, as it is possible for a man to be. He possesses no flowing
locks, his talk is not of "greasers," "grizzly b'ars," or "pesky
redskins." In fact, because he is more widely and more thoroughly
informed, he is much better educated than many who have passed through
one of the "Big Three" universities, and his English is as conventional
as though he had been brought up on the borders of Boston Common, rather
than on the borders of civilization.

In appearance he is slight, muscular, bronzed; with a finely formed
square jaw, and remarkable light blue eyes. These eyes apparently never
leave yours, but in reality they see everything behind you and about
you, above and below you. They tell of him that one day, while out with
a patrol on the veldt, he said he had lost the trail and, dismounting,
began moving about on his hands and knees, nosing the ground like a
bloodhound, and pointing out a trail that led back over the way the
force had just marched. When the commanding officer rode up, Burnham
said:

"Don't raise your head, sit. On that kopje to the right there is a
commando of Boers."

"When did you see them?" asked the officer.

"I see them now," Burnham answered.

"But I thought you were looking for a lost trail?"

"That's what the Boers on the kopje think," said Burnham.

In his eyes, possibly, owing to the uses to which they have been
trained, the pupils, as in the eyes of animals that see in the dark,
are extremely small. Even in the photographs that accompany this article
this feature of his eyes is obvious, and that he can see in the dark
the Kaffirs of South Africa firmly believe. In manner he is quiet,
courteous, talking slowly but well, and, while without any of that
shyness that comes from self-consciousness, extremely modest. Indeed,
there could be no better proof of his modesty than the difficulties I
have encountered in gathering material for this article, which I have
been five years in collecting. And even now, as he reads it by his
camp-fire, I can see him squirm with embarrassment.

Burnham's father was a pioneer missionary in a frontier hamlet called
Tivoli on the edge of the Indian reserve of Minnesota. He was a stern,
severely religious man, born in Kentucky, but educated in New York,
where he graduated from the Union Theological Seminary. He was
wonderfully skilled in wood-craft. Burnham's mother was a Miss Rebecca
Russell of a well-known family in Iowa. She was a woman of great
courage, which, in those days on that skirmish line of civilization,
was a very necessary virtue; and she was possessed of a most gentle and
sweet disposition. That was her gift to her son Fred, who was born on
May 11, 1861.

Project Gutenberg's Great Men and Famous Women. Vol. 1 of 8, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Great Men and Famous Women. Vol. 1 of 8
       A series of pen and pencil sketches of the lives of more
       than 200 of the most prominent personages in History

Author: Various

Editor: Charles F. Horne

Release Date: August 27, 2008 [EBook #26421]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GREAT MEN, FAMOUS WOMEN, VOL. 1 ***




Produced by Sigal Alon, Christine P. Travers and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)





[Transcriber's note: Obvious printer's errors have been corrected, all
other inconsistencies are as in the original. The author's spelling
has been maintained.

Captions marked with [TN] have been added while producing this file.]




[Illustration: Attila, "The Scourge of God".]




GREAT MEN AND FAMOUS WOMEN


_A Series of Pen and Pencil Sketches of_

THE LIVES OF MORE THAN 200 OF THE MOST PROMINENT PERSONAGES IN HISTORY


VOL. I.




Copyright, 1894, BY SELMAR HESS

edited by Charles F. Horne

[Illustration: Publisher's arm.]

New-York: Selmar Hess Publisher


Copyright, 1894, by SELMAR HESS.




CONTENTS OF VOLUME I.


  SUBJECT                         AUTHOR                          PAGE

  ALARIC THE BOLD,            _Archdeacon Farrar, D.D., F.R.S._,    56
  ALEXANDER THE GREAT,                                              10
  MARC ANTONY,                                                      37
  ATTILA,                     _Archdeacon Farrar, D.D., F.R.S._,    59
  BELISARIUS,                 _Charlotte M. Yonge_,                 64
  GODFREY DE BOUILLON,        _Henry G. Hewlett_,                   97
  JULIUS CÆSAR,               _E. Spencer Beesly, M.A._,            32
  CHARLEMAGNE,                _Sir J. Bernard Burke_,               75
  CLOVIS THE FIRST,           _Thomas Wyatt, A.M._,                 61
  GASPARD DE COLIGNI,         _Professor Creasy_,                  164
  HERNANDO CORTES,            _H. Rider Haggard_,                  150
  CYRUS THE GREAT,            _Clarence Cook_,                       5
  DIOCLETIAN,                                                       50
  SIR FRANCIS DRAKE,                                               176
  EDWARD I. OF ENGLAND,       _Thomas Davidson_,                   109
  EDWARD III. OF ENGLAND,                                          114
  EDWARD, THE BLACK PRINCE,   _L. Drake_,                          119
  BERTRAND DU GUESCLIN,                                            127
  GUSTAVUS ADOLPHUS,          _Hjalmar Hjorth Boyesen_,            199
  HANNIBAL,                   _Walter Whyte_,                       14
  HENRY IV. OF FRANCE,                                             171
  HENRY V. OF ENGLAND,        _G. P. R. James_,                    129
  HERMANN,                                                          40
  JOHN HUNIADES,              _Professor A. Vambéry_,              136
  CAIUS MARIUS,               _James Anthony Froude, LL.D._,        25
  CHARLES MARTEL,             _Henry G. Hewlett_,                   69
  NEBUCHADNEZZAR,             _Clarence Cook_,                       1
  PEPIN THE SHORT,            _Henry G. Hewlett_,                   72
  FRANCISCO PIZARRO,          _J. T. Trowbridge_,                  156
  SIR WALTER RALEIGH,                                              182
  SALADIN,                    _Walter Besant_,                     106
  SCIPIO AFRICANUS MAJOR,                                           18
  MILES STANDISH,             _Elbridge S. Brooks_,                189
  TRAJAN,                     _J. S. Reid, Litt. D._,               42
  OLAF TRYGGVESON,            _Thomas Carlyle_,                     83
  ALBRECHT VON WALLENSTEIN,   _Henry G. Hewlett_,                  194
  WARWICK, THE KING-MAKER,                                         146
  WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR,      _G. W. Prothero_,                     92




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

VOLUME I.


PHOTOGRAVURES


  ILLUSTRATION                           ARTIST              TO FACE PAGE

  ATTILA, "THE SCOURGE OF GOD,"          _Ulpiano Checa_    _Frontispiece_
  "AND HE WAS DRIVEN FROM MEN, AND DID
    EAT GRASS AS OXEN,"                  _Georges Rochegrosse_       4
  HANNIBAL CROSSING THE RHONE,           _Henri-Paul Motte_         14
  HERMANN'S TRIUMPH OVER THE ROMANS,     _Paul Thumann_             40
  ROME UNDER TRAJAN--A CHARIOT RACE,     _Ulpiano Checa_            48
  THE VICTIMS OF GALERIUS,               _E. K. Liska_              54
  ALARIC IN ATHENS,                      _Ludwig Thiersch_          56
  CHARLEMAGNE AT WITIKIND'S BAPTISM,     _Paul Thumann_             78
  HENRY V. REJECTS FALSTAFF,             _Eduard Grützner_         132
  THE ADMIRAL OF THE SPANISH ARMADA
    SURRENDERS TO DRAKE,                 _Seymour Lucas_           180
  GUSTAVUS ADOLPHUS BEFORE THE BATTLE OF
    LUTZEN,                              _Ludwig Braun_            202




WOOD-ENGRAVINGS AND TYPOGRAVURES


  ALEXANDER DISCOVERING THE BODY OF
    DARIUS,                              _Gustave Doré_             12
  GENEROSITY OF SCIPIO,                  _Schopin_                  20
  MARIUS ON THE RUINS OF CARTHAGE,       _John Vanderlyn_           32
  THE IDES OF MARCH,                     _Carl Von Piloty_          36
  THE LAST GLADIATORIAL CONTEST,         _J. Stallaert_             58
  CLOVIS PUNISHING A REBEL,              _Alphonse De Neuville_     62
  BELISARIUS RECEIVING ALMS,             _Jacques-Louis David_      68
  CHARLES MARTEL AT TOURS,               _Charles Steuben_          72
  PEPIN AFTER THE MURDER OF DUKE WAIFRE, _Th. Lybaert_              74
  A NORSE RAID UNDER OLAF,               _Hugo Vogel_               84
  WILLIAM AT HASTINGS,                   _P. J. De Loutherbourg_    94
  GODFREY DE BOUILLON ENTERING
    JERUSALEM,                           _Carl Von Piloty_         104
  SALADIN,                               _Gustave Doré_            108
  EDWARD III. AND THE BURGHERS OF
    CALAIS,                              _Berthelemy_              118
  BERTRAND DU GUESCLIN,                  _Alphonse De Neuville_    128
  HUNIADES AT BELGRADE,                  _Gustave Doré_            146
  YORK AND LANCASTER--THE RED AND WHITE
    ROSES,                                                         148
  PIZARRO EXHORTING HIS BAND AT GALLO,   _Lizcano_                 158
  HENRY IV. OF FRANCE AT HOME,           _J. D. Ingres_            176
  RALEIGH PARTING FROM HIS WIFE,         _E. Leutze_               188
  DEPARTURE OF THE MAYFLOWER,            _A. W. Bayes_             192
  WALLENSTEIN'S LAST BANQUET,            _J. Scholz_               198




SOLDIERS AND SAILORS

  Sleep, soldiers! still in honored rest
      Your truth and valor wearing:
  The bravest are the tenderest.
      The loving are the daring.

  --BAYARD TAYLOR




NEBUCHADNEZZAR[1]

By CLARENCE COOK

(645-561 B.C.)

         [Footnote 1: Copyright, 1894, by Selmar Hess.]

[Illustration: Nebuchadnezzar.]


With the death of Sardanapalus, the great monarch of Assyria, and the
taking of Nineveh, the capital city, by the Medes, the kingdom of
Assyria came to an end, and the vast domain was parcelled out among
the conquerors. At the time of the catastrophe, the district of
Babylonia, with its capital city Babylon, was ruled as a dependent
satrapy of Assyria by Nabopolassar. Aided by the Medes, he now took
possession of the province and established himself as an independent
monarch, strengthening the alliance by a marriage between the Princess
Amuhia, the daughter of the Median king, and his son Nebuchadnezzar.

In the partition of Assyria, the region stretching from Egypt to the
upper Euphrates, including Syria, Phoenicia, and Palestine, had fallen
to the share of Nabopolassar. But the tribes that peopled it were not
disposed to accept the rule of the new claimant, and looked about for
an ally to support them in their resistance. Such an ally they thought
they had found in Egypt.

Egypt was the great rival of Babylon, as she had been of Assyria. Both
desired to control the highways of traffic connecting the
Mediterranean with the farther East. Egypt had the advantage, both
from her actual position on the Mediterranean and her nearer
neighborhood to the coveted territory, and she used her advantage with
audacity and skill. No sooner, however, did Nabopolassar feel himself
firm on his throne than he resolved to check the ambition of Egypt and
secure for himself the sovereignty of the lands in dispute.

The task was not an easy one. Pharaoh Necho had been for three years
in possession of the whole strip along the Mediterranean--Palestine,
Phoenicia, and part of Syria--and was pushing victoriously on to
Assyria, when he was met at the plain of Megiddo, commanding the
principal pass in the range of Mount Carmel, by the forces of the
petty kingdom of Judah, disputing his advance. He defeated them in a
bloody engagement, in which Josiah, King of Judah, was slain, and then
continued his march to Carchemish, a stronghold built to defend one of
the few fordable passes of the upper Euphrates. This important place
having been taken after a bloody battle, Necho was master of all the
strategic points north and west of Babylonia.

Nebuchadnezzar was now put in command of an army, to force Pharaoh to
give up his prey. Marching directly upon Carchemish, he attacked the
Egyptian and defeated him with great slaughter. Following up his
victory, he wrested from Pharaoh, in engagement after engagement, all
that he had gained in Syria, Phoenicia, and Palestine, and was in the
midst of fighting in Egypt itself, when the news came of the death of
his father; and he hastened home at once by forced marches to secure
his possession of the throne. In his train were captives of all the
nations he had conquered: Syrians, Phoenicians, Jews, and Egyptians.
Among the Jewish prisoners was Daniel, the author of the book of the
Old Testament called by his name, and to whom we owe the little
personal knowledge we have of the great Babylonian monarch.

Of all the conquests of Nebuchadnezzar in this long struggle with
Egypt, that of the Jewish people is the most interesting to us. The
Jews had fought hard for independence, but if they must be conquered
and held in subjection, they preferred the rule of Egypt to that of
Babylon. Even the long slavery of their ancestors in that country and
the sufferings it had entailed, with the tragic memories of the exodus
and the wanderings in the desert, had not been potent to blot out the
traditions of the years passed in that pleasant land with its
delicious climate, its nourishing and abundant food. Alike in
prosperity and in evil days the hearts of the people of Israel yearned
after Egypt, and the denunciations of her prophets are never so bitter
as when uttered against those who turned from Jehovah to worship the
false gods of the Nile. Three times did the inhabitants of Jerusalem
rebel against the rule of Babylon, and three times did Nebuchadnezzar
come down upon them with a cruel and unrelenting vengeance, carrying
off their people into bondage, each time inflicting great damage upon
the city and leaving her less capable of resistance; yet each time her
rulers had turned to Egypt in the vain hope of finding in her a
defence against the oppressor, but in every instance Egypt had proved
a broken reed.

Of the three successive kings of Judah whom Nebuchadnezzar had left to
rule the city as his servants, and who had all in turn rebelled
against him, one had been condemned to perpetual imprisonment in
Babylon; a second had been carried there in chains and probably
killed, while the third, captured in a vain attempt to escape after
the taking of the city, had first been made to see his sons killed
before his eyes, had then been cruelly blinded, and afterward carried
in chains to Babylon, and cast into prison. The last siege of the
city lasted eighteen months, and when it was finally taken by assault,
its ruin was complete. By previous deportations Jerusalem had been
deprived of her princes, her warriors, her craftsmen, and her smiths,
with all the treasure laid up in the palace of her kings, and all the
vessels of gold and silver consecrated to the worship of Jehovah.
Little then was left for her to suffer, when the punishment of her
latest rebellion came. Her walls were thrown down, her temple, her
chief glory, was destroyed, the greater part of the inhabitants who
had survived the prolonged siege were carried off to swell the crowd
of exiles already in Babylon, and only a few of the humbler sort of
folk, the vine-dressers and the small farmers, were left behind.

When Nebuchadnezzar rested after his conquests, secure in the
subjugation of his rivals, and in the possession of his vast kingdom,
he gave himself up to the material improvement of Babylon and the
surrounding country. The city as he left it, at the end of his reign
of forty-three years, was built on both sides of the Euphrates, and
covered a space of four hundred square miles, equal to five times the
size of London. It was surrounded by a triple wall of brick; the
innermost, over three hundred feet high, and eighty-five feet broad at
the top, with room for four chariots to drive abreast. The walls were
pierced by one hundred gate-ways framed in brass and with brazen
gates, and at the points where the Euphrates entered and left the city
the walls also turned and followed the course of the river, thus
dividing the city into two fortified parts. These two districts were
connected by a bridge of stone piers, guarded by portcullises, and
ferries also plied between the quays that lined the river-banks, to
which access was given by gates in the walls.

Nebuchadnezzar's palace was a splendid structure covering a large
space at one end of the bridge. In the central court were the Hanging
Gardens, the chief glory of the city, and reckoned one of the wonders
of the world. No clear idea can be formed of these gardens from any
description that has come down to us, but it would appear that arches
eighty feet high supported terraces of earth planted with all the
skill for which the gardeners of the East were famous. We are told
that they were built for the pleasure of Queen Amuhia, who, as a
Median princess, missed her native mountains, but a more commonplace
explanation is that they were carried so high to escape the mosquitoes
that swarmed on the lower level.

Various splendid edifices, chiefly religious, adorned the great
squares of the city: the temple of the god Bel, enriched by the spoils
of Tyre and Jerusalem, was the especial pride of Nebuchadnezzar. It
rose in a succession of eight lofty stages, and supported on the top a
golden statue of the god, forty feet high. Still another temple of Bel
was built in seven stages, each faced with enamelled brick of one of
the planetary colors; the topmost one of blue, the color dedicated to
Mercury or Nebo, the patron god of Nabopolassar.

But the most important of the civic undertakings of Nebuchadnezzar was
the extension of the great system of canalization by which the barren
wastes of the Babylonian plain were made to rival the valley of the
Nile in fertility, and become the granary of the East. The whole
territory was covered with a network of canals fed by the Tigris and
Euphrates, and used for both irrigation and navigation. One branch had
already connected Nineveh with Babylon, and another constructed by
Nebuchadnezzar united Babylon to the Persian Gulf, running a distance
of four hundred miles. This is still to be traced in a portion of its
length.

The fate of Nebuchadnezzar is one of the most tragic in the long list
of calamities that have overtaken the great and powerful of the earth.
According to Daniel, it was just after the king had spoken those words
of exulting pride as he walked in the palace of the Kingdom of
Babylon: "Is not this great Babylon that I have built," when he was
attacked by that dreadful form of madness, called by the Greeks,
lycanthropy (wolf-man), in which the victim fancies himself a beast:
in its fiercer manifestations a beast of the forest, or in milder
visitations a beast of the field. Nebuchadnezzar's madness became so
violent that for four years he was exiled from his throne and from the
company of men, and wandered in the fields, eating grass like oxen,
"and his body was wet with the dews of heaven, and his hairs were
grown like eagles' feathers, and his nails like birds' claws."
Although no mention is made of this strange malady in any writing but
the book of Daniel, yet it has a pathetic confirmation in one of the
rock-cut inscriptions that record the acts of Nebuchadnezzar's reign.
"For four years the seat of my kingdom did not rejoice my heart. In
all my dominions I built no high place of power, nor did I lay up the
precious treasure of my kingdom. In Babylon I erected no buildings for
myself nor for the glory of my empire. In the worship of Bel-Merodach,
my Lord, the joy of my heart, in Babylon the city of his worship and
the seat of my empire, I did not sing his praise, nor did I furnish
his altar with victims"--and then, as if returning to the thing that
lay nearest him--"In four years I did not dig out the canals."

[Illustration: "And he was driven from men, and did eat grass as
oxen."]

In time, the black cloud of the king's madness passed away and health
and reason were restored to him. And if the words that Daniel puts
into the king's mouth on his recovery are really his, we must
recognize in this Eastern Despot a decided strain of religious
sensibility, a trait that appears beside in his almost passionate
expressions of affection for his god Merodach, and in his sympathy
with Daniel and the youths who were his companions, in their own
religious devotion. Although Daniel and the other youths whom the king
had caused to be called out from the mass of the Jewish captives for
his own particular service--boys distinguished from the rest by their
personal beauty, their intelligence and aptitude--were too earnest in
their religious convictions and too high-spirited to conform to the
Babylonian religion or to conceal their sentiments under the cloak of
policy, yet the king tolerated their adherence to their ritual and
yielded only in part to the persistence of the Jew-baiters, who saw
with angry eyes the promotion of the hated captives to places of power
and authority over the heads of their captors. In spite of his enemies
Daniel was allowed to exercise his own religion in peace; and the
persecutors of his companions, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, were
themselves destroyed in the furnace they had heated for their innocent
victims, which the youths themselves were rescued from by the personal
interposition of the king, who pretended to see--or in his religious
exaltation did really see--the god himself standing guard over the
victims in the midst of the flames.

Of Nebuchadnezzar after the recovery of his reason we learn but
little. The chronicle of Daniel passes abruptly from Nebuchadnezzar to
Belshazzar, and the great king is not mentioned again. History, too,
is silent. It tells us only that he left the throne to a son, whose
name, Evil-Merodach, records the devotion of his father to the god of
his people.

[Signature of the author.]




CYRUS THE GREAT[2]

By CLARENCE COOK

(REIGNED 558-529 B.C.)

         [Footnote 2: Copyright, 1894, by Selmar Hess.]

[Illustration: Cyrus the Great.]


The early life of Cyrus the Persian, like that of many another famous
conqueror, is lost in a cloud of fable. According to Herodotus, to
whom we owe the earliest account, Astyages the King of Media was
warned in a dream that some danger threatened the kingdom from the
offspring of his daughter Mandane, who as yet was unmarried. In order
to remove the danger, whatever it might be, as far as possible from
his throne, Astyages married his daughter to a Persian named Cambyses,
who took her with him to his own country. But after his daughter's
marriage Astyages had another dream, which was interpreted by the
priests to mean that his daughter's child was destined to reign in his
stead. Alarmed by this prophecy he sent for his daughter, and when in
course of time she bore a son, he ordered his trusty lieutenant
Harpagus to carry the child to his own house and kill it. Harpagus
took the infant as he had been ordered to do, but moved by the
pleadings of his wife he determined to commit the rest of his bloody
instructions to other hands. He therefore called one of his herdsmen,
and ordered him to expose the child on the bleakest part of the
mountain and leave it to perish, threatening him with the most
terrible penalties in case of disobedience. But the herdsman and his
wife were no more proof against pity than Harpagus and his wife had
been, and while they stood swayed between their wish to save the child
and their fear of disobeying Harpagus, fortune happily provided an
escape for them. The wife of the herdsman brought forth a dead child,
and this they determined to substitute for the living infant, and to
bring up the grandson of Astyages as their own. The exchange was
accomplished, and after some days the servants of Harpagus, sent to
inquire if their master's commands had been obeyed, were shown by the
herdsman the body of a dead child exposed on the rocks and still
wearing the rich clothes and ornaments in which it had been brought to
his house. Harpagus was thus enabled to assure Astyages that he was
safe from the threatened danger, and might enjoy his throne in peace.

When the child of Mandane was ten years old an accident brought him to
the knowledge of the king, and restored him to his birthright. One day
he was playing with the children of his neighbors, and in a certain
game where it was necessary to make one of the players king, Cyrus was
chosen, and all the others, as his subjects, promised to obey his
commands. But one of the boys, the son of a rich noble of the court of
Astyages, refused to do as he was bid by Cyrus, and according to the
rule of the game, he had to submit to a beating at the hand of the
boy-king. Angry at this treatment, he complained to his father, who,
indignant in his turn, went to Astyages, and reproached him with the
blows his son had received at the hands of the son of one of the
king's slaves. Cyrus was brought before the king; but when he was
asked how he had dared to treat the son of a nobleman in such a way,
the boy, nothing daunted, answered that he had done only what was
right: the rules of the game were known to all who had joined in it:
the other boys had submitted to the penalties: the son of the nobleman
alone had refused, and he had been punished as he deserved. "If any
wrong has been done by me," he said, "I am ready to suffer for it."
Struck by the boldness of the lad, and by something in his looks,
Astyages dismissed him for a time, and promised the nobleman that he
should be satisfied for the insults offered to his son. He then sent
for the herdsman Mitridates and wrung from him a confession of what he
had done; and learning how Harpagus had deceived him he acquitted
Mitridates, and turned all his vengeance upon Harpagus as the chief
offender. How cruelly he punished him must not be told here, for pity,
but it was such a barbarous revenge as could never be forgiven; and
though Harpagus pretended to make light of it, yet it was only that by
keeping fair with the king he might bide his time, and repay cruelty
with cruelty.

But now, as Cyrus in our story has grown to man's estate, and is ready
to show the world of what stuff he is made, it will be well to explain
in a few words, what was the state of things in that part of the
world where he was to play his part.

The mighty Kingdom of Assyria in its greatest estate had stretched
from the Indus on the east, to the Mediterranean on the west. But when
Nineveh, the capital and chief city of the empire, had been destroyed
by the Medes--a subject people living on the north-eastern borders of
the kingdom, but who had risen in rebellion against their
rulers--Assyria was broken in pieces, and several minor kingdoms rose
on her ruins.

Of these the chief were Media and Babylonia in the east, and Lydia in
the west. Babylonia rose to a great height of power and splendor under
Nebuchadnezzar, as we have seen in our sketch of that king's life. The
Medes, a brave and warlike people, never attained to so high a degree
of civilization as the Babylonians, nor did they ever have a monarch
whose fame equalled that of Sardanapalus, the King of Assyria; of
Nebuchadnezzar; or of Croesus, King of Lydia; but under a succession
of astute and hardy warriors, who held the throne for something over
one hundred and fifty years, their dominion was gradually extended
until it stretched from the Indus to the centre of Asia Minor. Their
greatest achievement had been the destruction of Nineveh in B.C. 606.

Lydia, the remaining province, touched the Median kingdom on the east,
and on the west was only separated, in the beginning, from the
Mediterranean by the narrow strip of territory occupied by the Greek
colonies, which for a time acted as a bar to the encroachments of the
Lydian monarchs and their conquerors.

When Cyrus came to manhood, these kingdoms, the successors of the
Assyrian monarchy, were all flourishing in wealth and power. Media was
ruled by Astyages, his grandfather--to accept the legendary history as
it has come down to us; Babylonia the greatest of the three was
governed by Nebuchadnezzar, while Lydia was ruled by Croesus, a
monarch wise above his peers, whose name has long been a synonym for
unbounded wealth, and whose story, though not beyond the bounds of
credibility, reads more like a fable of romance than a tale of sober
fact.

Croesus was the brother-in-law of Astyages, and in close alliance not
only with the Medes, but with the Babylonians, the Egyptians, and the
Greeks; and he was at the height of his power and was looking forward
to still greater increase of his dominions, when in an evil hour he
struck against the growing greatness of Cyrus, and was crushed in the
encounter. Had he been less arrogant, the doom he wrought for himself
might have been delayed, but it could not have been wholly averted.
Nothing could have long withstood the greed of Cyrus for universal
dominion.

We have seen what good cause Harpagus had to hate Astyages. But he
nursed his revenge with crafty wisdom, and knowing himself powerless
to act openly and alone, he tried what stratagem might do to bring
about his aim, which was no less than the overthrow of Astyages by
means of the tyrant's grandson, Cyrus. He did not take open measures
until he knew he had allies enough at his back, and could strike with
a sure aim. He worked with the great Median chiefs in private,
stirring them up against Astyages by appeals of all sorts: to their
ambition, their greed, their discontent, their private wrongs; and
when he had secured the consent of enough nobles to his plans, he
called upon Cyrus, as one who had chiefly suffered from the tyranny
and cruelty of the king, to lead the proposed revolt in person. He
knew that Cyrus had been gradually strengthening his own kingdom of
Persia in preparation for the ambitious schemes of conquest he was
nursing, but there was danger in correspondence with one who stood to
Astyages in the double relation of a feared and hated grandson, and
the chief of a rival people; and if we may believe Herodotus, Harpagus
had recourse to a strange expedient to communicate his design to
Cyrus. Disembowelling a dead hare, he inserted a letter in the cavity,
and sent the animal to Cyrus as a present. When the letter came to the
hands of Cyrus he eagerly accepted the offers it contained of
leadership in the proposed revolt, and joined his forces with those of
the disaffected Medes. Astyages was overthrown and his kingdom taken
possession of by Cyrus. Herodotus draws a striking picture of the
exultation of Harpagus over the success of his revengeful projects,
and of the disdain with which Astyages reproached him for having
called on another to do what, trusted and confided in as he was by his
monarch, he might have accomplished for himself, and reaped the
harvest which he had surrendered to another. Cyrus had the wisdom to
spare the life of Astyages, and to attach him to his person as
councillor and friend. Harpagus he made his lieutenant, and much of
his success was owing to this man's wisdom and bravery. After the
defeat of Astyages, Cyrus advanced against the lesser tribes that had
owed allegiance to the Median king, and having reduced them one by one
to submission, the power of the once mighty empire of the Medians
passed to the inheritance of the Persians in the year 559 B.C.

When Croesus heard of the overthrow of his brother-in-law by the hands
of Cyrus, and of the setting up a great new monarchy on the ruins of
the fallen kingdom, his own ambitious projects were blown into fresh
activity by the desire for private revenge. Misled by his own
interpretation of the oracle he consulted as to the likelihood of
success in an expedition against the Persians, he advanced to
withstand the conquering march of Cyrus; and his first success was
against the Syrians of Cappadocia, a people subject to Cyrus, as
having formed a part of the Median Kingdom. Cyrus, with a powerful
army, came at once to the assistance of his new subjects, and meeting
the forces of Croesus on the plain of Cappadocia, a fiercely fought,
but indecisive battle took place, which resulted in the retreat of
Croesus to his capital, Sardis, to seek the assistance of his allies
and prepare to meet Cyrus with a larger force. In overweening
confidence in his own success, he dismissed his mercenary troops, and
sent messengers to Babylon, to Egypt, and to Sparta, calling on them
to come with troops to his assistance within five months. No sooner
had he shut himself up in Sardis, and dismissed his mercenaries,
depending upon his own forces until assistance should come from his
allies, than Cyrus advanced against him so swiftly that there was no
escape from a battle. Croesus, believing in his fortune, and trusting
to the excellence of his cavalry, boldly took the field; but Cyrus,
using stratagem where perhaps courage would not have availed, put his
camels in front of his line, and massed his own horsemen behind them.
The horses of Croesus, maddened by the unaccustomed smell of the
camels, refused to advance; but the Lydians, dismounting, fought so
bravely on foot with their spears, that it was not until after a long
and fierce combat that they were forced to retreat and seek safety
within the walls of Sardis. The army of Cyrus invested the city, but
it was so strongly fortified on all sides but one as to be impregnable
by assault and the side left unprotected by art was supposed to be
amply protected by nature, since it abutted on the very edge of a
steep precipice. But, after the siege had lasted fourteen days, a
Persian sentinel saw one of the garrison descend the precipice to
recover his helmet that had rolled down; and no sooner had he thus
unwittingly showed the way, than the sentinel followed with a number
of his fellow-soldiers and, reaching the top of the cliff in safety,
attacked the guards, all unsuspicious, and gained an entrance to the
city. The gates were opened to the Persians, and Croesus with all his
vast store of treasure became the prey of the conqueror. The fall of
Sardis and the Lydian monarchy was followed by the subjection of the
Greek cities of Asia Minor, a task which Cyrus left to the hands of
Harpagus, while he himself turned eastward to pursue his conquests in
Upper Asia and in Assyria. His greatest achievement in this quarter
was the taking of Babylon. This he accomplished in the reign of
Belshazzar, one of the successors of Nebuchadnezzar, perhaps his son,
by turning the Euphrates, which ran through the middle of the city,
out of its course; and when its bed was dry he entered the city by
this road and captured it with little resistance.

Cyrus was now the sole master of the vast Assyrian Kingdom, once more
in his hands brought back to something like the unity it had before
the great Median revolt. But he was not content, nor was it perhaps
possible for him to rest in the enjoyment of power and possessions
extorted by force, and dependent on force to hold. The new empire,
like the old one, was destined to break in pieces by its own weight.
Cyrus was kept in constant activity by the necessity of resisting the
inroads on his empire of the tribes in the north and farther east; and
it was in endeavoring to repel invasion and to maintain order in the
regions he had already conquered, that he met his death. After a reign
of thirty years he was slain, in 529 B.C., in battle with the
Massagetæ, a tribe of Central Asia. He left his kingdom to his son
Cambyses.

[Signature of the author.]




ALEXANDER THE GREAT

(356-323 B.C.)

[Illustration: Alexander.]


Alexander the Great, son of Philip of Macedon and Olympias, daughter
of Neoptolemus of Epirus, was born at Pella, 356 B.C. His mind was
formed chiefly by Aristotle, who instructed him in every branch of
human learning, especially in the art of government. Alexander was
sixteen years of age when his father marched against Byzantium, and
left the government in his hands during his absence. Two years
afterward, he displayed singular courage at the battle of Chæronea
(338 B.C.), where he overthrew the Sacred Band of the Thebans. "My
son," said Philip, as he embraced him after the conflict, "seek for
thyself another kingdom, for that which I leave is too small for
thee." The father and son quarrelled, however, when the former
divorced Olympias. Alexander took part with his mother, and fled to
Epirus, to escape his father's vengeance; but receiving his pardon
soon afterward, he returned, and accompanied him in an expedition
against the Triballi, when he saved his life on the field. Philip,
being appointed generalissimo of the Greeks, was preparing for a war
with Persia, when he was assassinated (336 B.C.), and Alexander, not
yet twenty years of age, ascended the throne.

After punishing his father's murderers, he marched on Corinth, and in
a general assembly of the Greeks he caused himself to be appointed to
the command of the forces against Persia. On his return to Macedon, he
found the Illyrians and Triballi up in arms, whereupon he forced his
way through Thrace, and was everywhere victorious. But now the Thebans
had been induced, by a report of his death, to take up arms, and the
Athenians, stimulated by the eloquence of Demosthenes, were preparing
to join them. To prevent this coalition, Alexander rapidly marched
against Thebes, which, refusing to surrender, was conquered and razed
to the ground. Six thousand of the inhabitants were slain, and 30,000
sold into slavery; the house and descendants of the poet Pindar alone
being spared. This severity struck terror into all Greece. The
Athenians were treated with more leniency.

Alexander, having appointed Antipater his deputy in Europe, now
prepared to prosecute the war with Persia. He crossed the Hellespont
in the spring of 334 B.C. with 30,000 foot and 5,000 horse, attacked
the Persian satraps at the River Granicus, and gained a complete
victory, overthrowing the son-in-law of their king Darius with his own
lance. As a result of the battle, most of the cities of Asia Minor at
once opened their gates to the conqueror.

Alexander restored democracy in all the Greek cities; and as he passed
through Gordium, cut the Gordian-knot, which none should loose but the
ruler of Asia. During a dangerous illness at Tarsus, brought on by
bathing in the Cydnus, he received a letter insinuating that Philip,
his physician, had been bribed by Darius to poison him. Alexander
handed the letter to Philip, and at the same time swallowed the
draught which the latter had prepared. As soon as he recovered, he
advanced toward the defiles of Cilicia, in which Darius had stationed
himself with an army of 600,000 men.

He arrived in November, 333 B.C., in the neighborhood of Issus, where,
on the narrow plain between the mountains and the sea, the unwieldy
masses of the Persians were thrown into confusion by the charge of the
Macedonians, and fled in terror. On the left wing, 30,000 Greek
mercenaries held out longer, but they, too, were at length compelled
to yield. All the treasures as well as the family of Darius fell into
the hands of the conqueror, who treated them with the greatest
magnanimity. Overtures for peace, made by Darius on the basis of
surrendering to Alexander all Asia west of the Euphrates, were
rejected.

Alexander now turned toward Syria and Phoenicia. He occupied Damascus,
where he found princely treasures, and secured to himself all the
cities along the shores of the Mediterranean. Tyre, confident in its
strong position, resisted him, but was conquered and destroyed, after
seven months of incredible exertion (332 B.C.) Thence he marched
victoriously through Palestine, where all the cities submitted to him
except Gaza; it shared the same fate as Tyre. Egypt, weary of the
Persian yoke, welcomed him as a deliverer; and in order to strengthen
his dominion here, he restored all the old customs and religious
institutions of the country, and founded Alexandria in the beginning
of 331 B.C. Thence he marched through the Libyan Desert, in order to
consult the oracle of Ammon, whose priest saluted him as a son of
Zeus; and he returned with the conviction that he was indeed a god.

He then again set out to meet Darius; in October, 331 B.C., a great
battle was fought on the plain stretching eastward to Arbela.
Notwithstanding the immense superiority of his adversary, who had
collected a new army of more than a million men, Alexander was not for
a moment doubtful of victory. Heading the cavalry himself, he rushed
on the Persians, and put them to flight; then hastened to the
assistance of his left wing, which, in the meanwhile, had been surely
pressed. He was anxious to make Darius a prisoner, but Darius escaped
on horseback, leaving his baggage and all his treasures a prey to the
conqueror. Babylon and Susa, the treasure-houses of the East, opened
their gates to Alexander, who next marched toward Persepolis, the
capital of Persia, which he entered in triumph.

The marvellous successes of Alexander now began to dazzle his judgment
and to inflame his passions. He became a slave to debauchery, and his
caprices were as cruel as they were ungrateful. In a fit of
drunkenness, and at the instigation of Thaïs, an Athenian courtesan,
he set fire to Persepolis, the wonder of the world, and reduced it to
a heap of ashes; then, ashamed of the deed, he set out with his
cavalry in pursuit of Darius. Learning that Bessus, the Bactrian
satrap, held him a prisoner, he hastened his march, in the hope of
saving him, but he found him mortally wounded (330 B.C.). He mourned
over his fallen enemy, and caused him to be buried with all the
customary honors, while he hunted down Bessus, who himself aspired to
the throne, chasing him over the Oxus to Sogdiana (Bokhara).

Having discovered a conspiracy in which the son of Parmenio was
implicated, he put both father and son to death, though Parmenio
himself was innocent of any knowledge of the affair. This cruel
injustice excited universal displeasure. In 329 he penetrated to the
farthest known limits of Northern Asia, and overthrew the Scythians on
the banks of the Jaxartes. In the following year he subdued the whole
of Sogdiana, and married Roxana, whom he had taken prisoner. She was
the daughter of Oxyartes, one of the enemy's captains, and was said to
be the fairest of all the virgins of Asia. The murder of his
foster-brother, Clitus, in a drunken brawl, was followed, in 327 B.C.,
by the discovery of a fresh conspiracy, in which Callisthenes, a
nephew of Aristotle, was falsely implicated. For challenging
Alexander's divinity, he was cruelly tortured and hanged.

In 327 B.C., proceeding to the conquest of India, hitherto known only
by name, Alexander crossed the Indus near to the modern Attock, and
pursued his way under the guidance of a native prince to the Hydaspes
(Jhelum). He there was opposed by Porus, another native prince, whom
he overthrew after a bloody contest, and there he lost his charger
Bucephalus; thence he marched as lord of the country, through the
Punjab, establishing Greek colonies. He then wished to advance to the
Ganges, but the general murmuring of his troops obliged him, at the
Hyphasis (modern Sutlej), to commence his retreat. On regaining the
Hydaspes, he built a fleet, and sent one division of his army in it
down the river, while the other followed along the banks, fighting its
way through successive Indian armies. At length, having reached the
ocean, he ordered Nearchus, the commander of the fleet, to sail thence
to the Persian Gulf, while he himself struck inland with one division
of his army, in order to return home through Gedrosia (Beluchistan).
During this march his forces suffered fearfully from want of food and
water. Of all the troops which had set out with Alexander, little more
than a fourth part arrived with him in Persia (325 B.C.).

[Illustration: Alexander discovering the Body of Darius.]

At Susa he married Stateira, the daughter of Darius, and he bestowed
presents on those Macedonians (some ten thousand in number) who had
married Persian women, his design being to unite the two nations. He
also distributed liberal rewards among his soldiers. Soon afterward he
was deprived, by death, of his favorite Hephestion. His grief was
unbounded, and he interred the dead man with kingly honors. As he was
returning from Ecbatana to Babylon, it is said that the Magi
foretold that the latter city would prove fatal to him; but he
despised their warnings. On the way, he was met by ambassadors from
all parts of the world--Libya, Italy, Carthage, Greece, the Scythians,
Celts, and Iberians.

At Babylon he was busy with gigantic plans for the future, both of
conquest and civilization, when he was suddenly taken ill after a
banquet, and died eleven days later, 323 B.C., in the thirty-second
year of his age, and the thirteenth of his reign. His body was
deposited in a golden coffin at Alexandria, by Ptolemæus, and divine
honors were paid to him, not only in Egypt, but in other countries. He
had appointed no heir to his immense dominions; but to the question of
his friends, "Who should inherit them?" he replied, "The most worthy."
After many disturbances, his generals recognized as Kings the
weak-minded Aridæus--a son of Philip by Philinna, the dancer--and
Alexander's posthumous son by Roxana, Alexander Ægus, while they
shared the provinces among themselves, assuming the title of satraps.
Perdiccas, to whom Alexander had, on his death-bed, delivered his
ring, became guardian of the kings during their minority. The empire
of Alexander soon broke up, and his dominions were divided among his
generals.

Alexander was more than a conqueror. He diffused the language and
civilization of Greece wherever victory led him, and planted Greek
kingdoms in Asia, which continued to exist for some centuries. At the
very time of his death, he was engaged in devising plans for the
drainage of the unhealthy marshes around Babylon, and a better
irrigation of the extensive plains. It is even supposed that the fever
which he caught there, rather than his famous drinking-bout, was the
real cause of his death. To Alexander, the ancient world owed a vast
increase of its knowledge in geography, natural history, etc. He
taught Europeans the road to India, and gave them the first glimpses
of that magnificence and splendor which has dazzled and captivated
their imagination for more than two thousand years. See Freeman's
"Historical Essays" (2d series, 1873), and Mahaffy's "Alexander's
Empire" (1887).

The wonderful element in the campaigns of Alexander, and his tragical
death at the height of his power, threw a rare romantic interest
around his figure. It is ever the fate of a great name to be enshrined
in fable, and Alexander soon became the hero of romantic story,
scarcely more wonderful than the actual, but growing from age to age
with the mythopoeic spirit which can work as freely in fact as
fiction. The earliest form of the story which we know is the great
romance connected with the name of Callisthenes, which, under the
influence of the living popular tradition, arose in Egypt about 200
A.D., and was carried through Latin translations to the West, through
Armenian and Syriac versions to the East. It became widely popular
during the middle ages, and was worked into poetic form by many
writers in French and German. Alberich of Besançon wrote in Middle
High German an epic on the subject in the first half of the twelfth
century, which was the basis of the German "Pfaffe" Lamprecht's
"Alexanderbuch," also of the twelfth century. The French poets Lambert
li Court and Alexandre de Bernay composed, between 1180 and 1190, a
romance of Alexander, the twelve-syllable metre of which gave rise to
the name _Alexandrines_. The German poem of Rudolf of Ems was based on
the Latin epic of Walter of Châtillon, about 1200, which became
henceforward the prevailing form of the story. In contrast with it is
the thirteenth century Old English epic of Alexander (in vol. i. of
Weber's "Metrical Romances," 1810), based on the Callisthenes version.
The story appears also in the East, worked up in conjunction with
myths of other nationalities, especially the Persian. It appears in
Firdusi, and among later writers, in Nizami. From the Persians both
the substance of the story and its form in poetical treatment have
extended to Turks and other Mohammedans, who have interpreted
Alexander as the _Dsulkarnein_ ('two horned') of the Koran, and to the
Hindus, which last had preserved no independent traditions of
Alexander.




HANNIBAL

By WALTER WHYTE

(247-183 B.C.)

[Illustration: Hannibal.]


Hannibal (the grace of Baal, the Hanniel of Scripture) was the son of
the great Carthaginian general Hamilcar Barca, and was born in 247
B.C. It is said that in his ninth year his father led him to an altar
and bade him swear eternal enmity to Rome. From the age of nine to
eighteen he was trained in war and diplomacy under Hamilcar in Spain;
and from his eighteenth to his twenty-fifth year he was the chief
agent in carrying out the plans by which his brother-in-law,
Hasdrubal, extended and consolidated the Carthaginian dominion in the
Peninsula. On the death of Hasdrubal, in 221 B.C., the soldiers with
one voice chose Hannibal, then in his twenty-sixth year, as their
general. Forthwith he crossed the Tagus, and in two years reduced all
Spain up to the Ebro, with the exception of the Greek colony of
Saguntum. That town, which claimed the protection of Rome, fell in 218
B.C., and the Second Punic War, or, as the Romans justly called it,
"the War of Hannibal," began. Garrisoning Libya with Spaniards, and
Spain with Libyans (a precaution against treachery), Hannibal set
out on his march for Rome. In the summer of 218 B.C. he left New
Carthage with 90,000 foot, 12,000 horse, and 37 elephants, crossed the
Pyrenees, and gained the Rhone, where his passage was barred by a host
of Gauls. The general thereupon sent part of his troops two days'
journey up-stream, with orders to cross the Rhone and fall on the rear
of the barbarians. His orders were executed by Hanno, and the passage
of the river was safely effected. He crossed the Alps in fifteen days,
in the face of obstacles which would have proved insuperable to almost
any other commander. His troops, reared under African and Spanish
suns, perished in thousands amid ice and snow. The native tribes
threatened the annihilation of his force, and were only dispersed by
his matchless courage and address. The beasts of burden fell over
precipices, or stuck fast and were frozen to death. In places, rocks
had to be shattered and roads constructed to enable the men to creep
round projecting crags. When he gained the valley of Aosta, Hannibal
had but 20,000 foot and 6,000 horse to attempt the conquest of a power
which had lately shown that she could put an army of 170,000
unrivalled soldiers into the field.

[Illustration: Hannibal crossing the Rhone.]

After allowing his men to recruit in the villages of the friendly
Insubres, he overcame the Taurini, besieging and taking Turin, and
forced the Ligurian and Celtic tribes on the Upper Po to serve in his
army. At the Ticinus, a stream which enters the Po near Pavia, he
encountered the Romans under Scipio, the father of Scipio Africanus.
The cavalry of both armies joined battle, Hannibal's Numidian horse
proved their superiority, and Scipio fell back beyond the Po. The
Carthaginians crossed the river, and the first great battle of the
campaign was fought in the plain of the Trebia. Placing Mago in ambush
with 2,000 men, Hannibal enticed the Romans across the stream. His
light troops retired before the legionaries, and as Scipio was
pressing on to fancied victory he was taken in flank by the terrible
Numidian horse, Mago came down in the rear, and the 40,000 men of the
consular army were either cut to pieces or scattered in flight.
Wintering in the valley of the Po, in the early spring Hannibal
crossed the Apennines and pushed through a region of lakes, flooded by
the melting of the snow, to Fæsulæ. The beasts of burden perished in
vast numbers amid the morasses; the Gauls, disheartened by the perils
of the journey, had to be driven forward by Mago's horsemen, and the
general lost an eye. Quitting Fæsulæ, Hannibal wasted Etruria with
fire and sword, and marched toward Rome, leaving behind him two
consular armies of 60,000 men. He awaited the consul Flaminius by the
Lake Trasimene, where the hills, retiring in a semicircle from the
shore, inclose a plain entered by two narrow passes. Concealing the
main body of his army amid the hills, he placed his Numidians in
ambush at the pass by which the Romans must enter; while he stationed
part of his infantry in a conspicuous position near the other defile.
The Romans pushed into the valley; the pass in their rear was secured
by the Carthaginians who had lain in ambush; Hannibal's men charged
from the heights, and the army of Flaminius was annihilated. Six
thousand infantry cut their way through the farther pass, but these
were overtaken by the horse under Maherbal and forced to yield on the
following day.

After recruiting his men in the champaign country of Picenum, where
the Numidian horses, we are told, were groomed with old Italian wine,
Hannibal marched through Apulia and ravaged Campania, dogged by the
dictator Quintus Fabius Maximus, whom he vainly endeavored to entice
into an engagement. He wintered at Gerontium, and in the spring took
up a position at Cannæ, on the Aufidus. A Roman army of 80,000 men,
under the consuls L. Æmilius Paulus and P. Terentius Varro, marched
against him. Hannibal flung his troops (he had but 30,000) into a
space inclosed on the rear and wings by a loop of the river. He placed
his Spanish infantry in the centre, with the African foot on either
flank. His Numidian horse, now reduced to 2,000 men, he posted on the
right wing; while Hasdrubal, with 8,000 heavy cavalry, was opposed to
the Roman cavalry on the left. The legionaries pressed into the loop,
and Hannibal drew back his centre before them. Hasdrubal, on the left,
broke the Roman cavalry, swept round to the left wing of the Romans,
drove the second detachment of Roman horse into flight, and then came
thundering in the rear of the legionaries. The Libyans, who had by the
general's orders fallen back as the Romans pressed after the retiring
Spanish infantry, now closed on the enemy's flanks. Packed together so
closely that they could not use their weapons, assailed in front,
flank, and rear, the legionaries were hewn down through eight hours of
carnage, till 50,000 lay dead on the field. The battle became a
butchery. Nearly 20,000 men were taken prisoners. The consul Paulus,
the proconsul Servilius, the master of the horse Minucius, 21 military
tribunes, and 60 senators lay amid the slain. On his side Hannibal
lost but 5,700 men. "Send me on with the horse, general," said
Maherbal, "and in five days thou shalt sup in the Capitol."

But the general was wiser than the fiery captain of the horse. It has
been common to censure Hannibal for neglecting to march on Rome after
the battle of Cannæ. But his dazzling triumph did not for a moment
unsettle his clear judgment. He knew that his forces were unequal to
the task of storming a walled city garrisoned by a population of
fighting men. An attack which he had made on Spoletium had proved the
inadequacy of the small Carthaginian army to carry a strongly
fortified town. Had he followed the advice of Maherbal, he would in
all likelihood have dashed his army to pieces against the walls of
Rome. His aim was to destroy the common oppressor by raising the
Italian allies against her; and the hope was partly justified by the
revolt of Lucania and Bruttium, Samnium and Apulia. The soundness of
judgment, the patience and self-control which he evinced in this hour
of intoxicating success, are hardly less marvellous than the genius by
which the success had been won. After the battle of Cannæ the
character of the war changes. Hitherto Hannibal had swept everything
before him. Rivers and mountains and morasses had been powerless to
thwart his progress. Army after army, vastly superior in numbers and
composed of the best fighting men the ancient world ever saw, had come
against him to be broken, scattered, and destroyed. His career through
Italy had been, in the words of Horace, as the rush of the flames
through a forest of pines. But after Cannæ the tide turned. His
niggardly, short-sighted countrymen denied him the support without
which success was impossible. As his veterans were lost to him he had
no means of filling their places, while the Romans could put army
after army into the field. But through the long years during which he
maintained a hopeless struggle in Italy he was never defeated. Nor did
one of his veterans desert him; never was there a murmur of
disaffection in his camp. It has been well said that his victories
over his motley followers were hardly less wonderful than his
victories over nature and over Rome.

Hannibal spent the winter of 216-215 B.C. at Capua, where his men are
said to have been demoralized by luxurious living. When he again took
the field the Romans wisely avoided a pitched battle, though the
Carthaginians overran Italy, capturing Locri, Thurii, Metapontum,
Tarentum, and other towns. In 211 B.C. he marched on Rome, rode up to
the Colline gate, and, it is said, flung his spear over the walls. But
the fall of Capua smote the Italian allies with dismay, and ruined his
hopes of recruiting his ever-diminishing forces from their ranks. In
210 B.C. he overcame the prætor Fulvius at Herdonea, and in the
following year gained two battles in Apulia. Thereafter, he fell upon
the consuls Crispinus and Marcellus, both of whom were slain and their
forces routed, while he almost annihilated the Roman army which was
besieging Locri. In 207 B.C. his brother Hasdrubal marched from Spain
to his aid, but was surprised, defeated, and slain at the Metaurus by
the consul Nero. By the barbarous commands of Nero, Hasdrubal's head
was flung into the camp of Hannibal, who had been till then in
ignorance of his brother's doom. The battle of the Metaurus sealed the
fate of "the lion's brood"--of the great house of Hamilcar. But for
four years Hannibal stood at bay in the hill-country of Bruttium,
defying with his thinned army every general who was sent against him,
till in 202 B.C., after an absence of fifteen years, he was recalled
to Africa to repel the Roman invasion. In the same year he met Scipio
at Zama; his raw levies fled, and in part went over to the enemy; his
veterans were cut to pieces where they stood, and Carthage was at the
mercy of Rome. So ended the Second Punic War--the war, as Arnold so
truly said, of a man with a nation, and the war which is perhaps the
most wonderful in all history. Three hundred thousand Italians had
fallen, and three hundred towns had been destroyed in the struggle.

Peace being made, Hannibal turned his genius to political toils. He
amended the constitution, cut down the power of the ignoble oligarchy,
checked corruption, and placed the city's finances on a sounder
footing. The enemies whom he made by his reforms denounced him to the
Romans, and the Romans demanded that he should be surrendered into
their hands. Setting out as a voluntary exile, Hannibal visited Tyre,
the mother-city of Carthage, and then betook himself to the court of
Antiochus, at Ephesus. He was well received by the king, who
nevertheless rejected his advice to carry the war with Rome into
Italy. On the conclusion of peace, to avoid being given up to the
Romans, he repaired to Prusias, king of Bithynia, for whom he gained a
naval victory over the king of Pergamus. The Romans again demanding
that he should be surrendered, he baffled his enemies by taking
poison, which, we are told, he carried about with him in a ring, and
died at Lybyssa about the year 183 B.C.

In judging of the character and achievements of Hannibal, it must
never be forgotten, that for all we know of him, we are indebted to
his implacable enemies. No Carthaginian record of that astounding
career has come down to us. The Romans did all that unscrupulous
malignity can, to blacken the fame and belittle the deeds of the most
terrible of their foes. Yet, though calumny has done its bitterest
against him, Hannibal not only dazzles the imagination, but takes
captive the heart. He stands out as the incarnation of magnanimity and
patriotism and self-sacrificing heroism, no less than of incomparable
military genius. Napoleon, the only general who could plausibly
challenge the Carthaginian's supremacy, had throughout the greater
part of his career an immense superiority to his adversaries in the
quality of the forces which he wielded. He had the enthusiasm of the
Revolution behind him, and he was unhampered by authorities at home.
Hannibal, on the contrary, saw his plans thwarted and finally wrecked
by the sordid merchant-nobles of the city he strove so hard to save.
He had not, like Alexander, to lead picked troops against effeminate
Asiatics. He had to mould his little army out of raw and barbarous
levies. He had no reinforcements to fall back on. With a motley army
of Libyans, Gauls, and Spaniards he had to encounter a nation in
arms--a nation of the stoutest and most highly trained warriors of
ancient times. There is not in all history so wonderful an example of
what a single man of genius may achieve against the most tremendous
odds, as the story of the Phoenician hero--the greatest captain that
the world has seen.




SCIPIO AFRICANUS MAJOR

(235-183 B.C.)

[Illustration: Scipio.]


P. Cornelius Scipio, Africanus Major, was the son of that P. Cornelius
Scipio who was defeated by Hannibal at the Ticinus. If it be true that
at the age of seventeen Scipio fought in this battle, and rescued his
wounded father, he must have been born in B.C. 235. He was in the
battle of Cannæ (B.C. 216) as a tribune, and was among those who,
after the defeat, escaped to Canusium. Here the chief command of the
remaining troops was unanimously entrusted to him and another. On this
occasion it was owing to his presence of mind that the remnants of the
Roman army did not, in their despair, quit Italy.

In B.C. 212, Scipio was curule ædile, though he had not yet attained
the legitimate age. The tribunes of the people endeavored to prevent
his election, but they were obliged to give up their opposition, for
the people, who seem to have perceived the extraordinary abilities of
the young man, elected him almost unanimously. In B.C. 211 his father
and uncle fell in Spain, and the Carthaginians again took possession
of the country, which they had almost entirely lost. When Capua had
fallen again into their hands, and Italy no longer required their
exclusive attention, the Romans determined to act with more energy
against the Carthaginians in Spain. On the day of the election, no one
ventured to come forward to undertake the command in this war. Young
Scipio, then scarcely twenty-four years of age, at last offered to
take the command of the army in Spain. The people were struck with
admiration at the courage of the young man, and gave him command, with
proconsular power, which was afterward prolonged to him for several
years (B.C. 210-206).

The extraordinary power which young Scipio exercised over his
contemporaries was perhaps partly owing to superstition, for he was
believed to be a favorite of the gods. Ever since he had risen to
manhood, he went every morning into the Capitol, where he spent some
hours in solitude and meditation. Hence all he did was considered by
the people to be the result of his intercourse with the gods. Scipio
himself partook in this opinion, and cherished it; and the
extraordinary success of all his enterprises must have strengthened
his belief.

Toward the end of the summer, in B.C. 210, or, as Livy says, at the
beginning of spring, Scipio set out for Spain with an army of 11,000
men, landed at the mouth of the Iberus, and undertook the command of
the whole Roman forces in Spain. He was accompanied by his friend,
Lælius. His first object was to gain possession of New Carthage, where
the Carthaginians kept their Spanish hostages. Lælius made the attack
with the fleet from the seaside, while Scipio conducted the operations
on land. The town soon fell into the hands of the Romans, and the
generosity with which Scipio treated the Spanish hostages gained over
a great number of Spaniards. The hostages of those tribes who declared
themselves allies of the Romans were sent home without ransom. It is
also related that a very beautiful maiden having fallen to his special
lot in the division of the booty, Scipio finding her sad, inquired the
cause, and learning that she was betrothed to a neighboring chief,
sent for the lover, and personally restored the maid in all honor to
his arms. A short time after the conquest of this place Scipio went to
Tarraco, where he received embassies from various Spanish tribes, who
offered to become the allies of the Romans or to recognize their
supremacy.

Scipio is said not to have set out against Hasdrubal until the year
following, but it can scarcely be conceived why the Carthaginians
should have been so long inactive, and it is a probable supposition
that the battle with Hasdrubal, which Livy and Polybius assign to the
year B.C. 209, was fought very soon after the taking of New Carthage.
In this battle Scipio gained a great victory; 8,000 Carthaginians were
slain, and 22,000, with their camp, fell into the hands of the victor.
Many of the Spaniards now wished to proclaim Scipio their king, but he
refused the honor.

Hasdrubal fled with the remainder of his army toward the Tagus and the
Pyrenees. Scipio did not follow him, partly because he thought his
enemy too much weakened to be dangerous, and partly because he feared
lest he might expose himself to the combined attacks of the two other
Carthaginian generals, Mago, and Hasdrubal, son of Gisco. Hasdrubal
Barcas, the defeated general, however, had carried considerable wealth
with him in his flight, and with these means he raised an army in
Spain, to lead into Italy to the assistance of his brother Hannibal,
hoping thus to bring the war to an end in Italy. During these
preparations of Hasdrubal, Scipio was engaged against the two other
Carthaginian generals, one of whom (Mago) was defeated, in B.C. 208,
by the proprætor Silanus, in the country of the Celtiberians, and
Hanno, who came with an auxiliary army from Africa, was taken
prisoner. After this success of the proprætor, Scipio united his
forces with those of Silanus to attack Hasdrubal, son of Gisco. But as
this general had retired to the south of Spain, and had distributed
his army in the fortified places on the Bætis as far as Gades, Scipio
(through his brother Lucius) only took the important town of Oringis,
and then gradually returned across the Iberus. The power of the
Carthaginians in Spain was, however, already broken, and in the year
following (B.C. 207) Scipio gained possession of nearly all Spain by a
victory, the place of which is not clearly ascertained, some calling
it Silpia or Bæcula, some Ilipa, and others Carmo.

Scipio, now in the almost undisputed possession of Spain, began to
turn his eyes to Africa, and, accompanied by his friend Lælius, he
ventured to pay a visit to King Syphax, with whom Lælius had already
commenced negotiations. Here Scipio is said to have met Hasdrubal, son
of Gisco, and to have made a very favorable impression on Syphax as
well as on Hasdrubal. After a short stay in Africa, Scipio returned to
Spain, where he first punished several towns for their faithlessness,
and subdued some of the Spanish chiefs who ventured to claim their
former independence. During these occupations Scipio was attacked by a
severe illness, from which, however, he recovered in time to quell an
insurrection of 8,000 Roman soldiers, who were discontented from not
having derived from their conquests those advantages which they had
expected, and who are said also to have been bribed by the
Carthaginians. Mago had in the meantime withdrawn to the Balearic
Islands, and thence to Liguria. Gades, the last place which the
Carthaginians possessed in Spain, was now taken from them, and thus
the war in Spain was at an end.

[Illustration: Generosity of Scipio.]

Toward the close of the year B.C. 206, Scipio surrendered the command
of the Roman forces in Spain to the proconsuls L. Lentulus and L.
Manlius Acidinus, and returned to Rome. He delivered to the ærarium
the immense treasures which he brought from Spain. He evidently
wished for a triumph, but the senate paid no attention to his wishes,
for no one had ever triumphed at Rome before he had held the
consulship. In the year B.C. 205, Scipio was made consul with P.
Licinius Crassus, who was at the same time pontifex maximus, and was
consequently not allowed to leave Italy. If, therefore, a war was to
be carried on abroad, the command necessarily devolved upon Scipio.
His wish was immediately to sail with an army to Africa, but the more
cautious senators, and especially Q. Fabius, were decidedly opposed to
his plan, partly because Hannibal, as long as he was in Italy,
appeared too formidable to be neglected, and partly because they were
influenced by jealousy.

All that Scipio could obtain was that Sicily should be assigned to him
as his province, with thirty vessels, and with permission to sail over
to Africa in case he should think it advantageous to the republic. But
he did not obtain from the Senate permission to levy an army, and he
therefore called upon the Italian allies to provide him with troops
and other things necessary for carrying on the war. As they were all
willing to support the conqueror of the Carthaginians in Spain, he was
soon enabled to sail to Sicily with nearly seven thousand volunteers
and thirty ships. Soon after his arrival in Sicily he sent his friend
Lælius with a part of his fleet to Africa, partly to keep up the
connection which he had formed there, on his visit from Spain, with
Syphax and Massinissa (for to the latter Scipio had sent back a nephew
who had been taken prisoner in the battle of Bæcula), and partly to
show to his timid opponents at Rome how groundless their fears were.
He himself employed his time in Sicily most actively, in preparing and
disciplining his new army.

Massinissa, dissatisfied with the Carthaginians, was anxious for the
arrival of Scipio in Africa, but Syphax had altered his policy, and
again joined the Carthaginians. The enemies of Scipio at Rome at last
got an opportunity of attacking him, and they nearly succeeded in
depriving him of his post. Without being authorized by the Senate,
Scipio had taken part in the conquest of Locri, in Southern Italy, and
had left his legate, Q. Flaminius, as commander of the Roman garrison
in that place. The legate treated the Locrians with such severity and
cruelty that they sent an embassy to Rome to lay their complaints
before the Senate. As Scipio, although acquainted with the conduct of
Flaminius, had nevertheless left him in command, his enemies attacked
him on this and other grounds, and Fabius Maximus even proposed that
he should be recalled. A commission was sent out to inquire into the
state of affairs and to bring Scipio home, if the charges against him
were found true. Scipio proved that his army was in the best possible
condition; and the commissioners were so surprised at what they saw,
that instead of recalling the consul, they bade him sail to Africa as
soon as he might think it proper, and to adopt any measures that he
might think useful.

Scipio, in consequence of this, sailed in B.C. 204 as proconsul, with
a large army, from Lilybæum to Africa, and landed in the neighborhood
of Utica. Here he made successful incursions into the neighboring
country, and Hasdrubal, who attempted to prevent them, suffered a
great defeat. But Scipio could not gain possession of Utica, which was
of the greater importance to him and his fleet as the winter was
approaching, and he was obliged to spend the season on a piece of land
extending into the sea, which he fortified as well as he could. Toward
the close of the winter the Carthaginians, united with Syphax,
intended to make a general attack on Scipio's army and fleet, but
being informed of their plans, he surprised the camps of Hasdrubal and
Syphax in the night, and only a small number of the enemy escaped.
Syphax withdrew into his own dominions, but was defeated by Massinissa
and Lælius, and taken prisoner with his wife and one of his sons.
Massinissa married Sophonisba, the wife of Syphax, who had formerly
been engaged to him, but had been given to Syphax for political
reasons. Scipio, fearing the influence she might have on Massinissa
(for she was a Carthaginian), claimed her as a prisoner belonging to
the Romans, and Massinissa poisoned her, to save her from the
humiliation of captivity.

The fears and apprehensions of the Carthaginians now increased to such
a degree that they thought it necessary to recall Hannibal from Italy,
and at the same time they sued for peace. The terms which Scipio
proposed would have concluded the war in a manner honorable to the
Romans. The Carthaginians, however, whose only object was to gain
time, made no objections to the conditions, but only concluded a truce
of forty-five days, during which an embassy was to be sent to Rome.
Before this truce was at an end, the Carthaginian populace plundered
some Roman vessels with provisions, which were wrecked off Carthage,
and even insulted the Roman envoys who came to demand reparation.
Scipio did not resent this conduct and allowed the Carthaginian
ambassadors, on their return from Rome, to pass on to Carthage
unmolested. About this time (it was the autumn of the year B.C. 203)
Hannibal arrived in Africa, and soon collected an army in numbers far
exceeding that of Scipio. He first made a successful campaign against
Massinissa. Scipio was at this time informed that the consul Tib.
Claudius Nero would come with an army to co-operate with him against
Hannibal.

Scipio, who wished to bring the war to a conclusion, and was unwilling
to share the glory with anyone else, determined to bring Hannibal to a
decisive battle. The Carthaginian at first avoided an engagement; but
when Scipio, in order to deceive the enemy, hastily retreated as if he
intended to take to flight, Hannibal followed him with his cavalry and
lost a battle in the neighborhood of Zama. A tribune of Scipio soon
afterward cut off a large convoy of provisions which was on its way to
the camp of Hannibal, and this suddenly threw him into such
difficulties that he began to negotiate with Scipio for peace. The
conditions, however, which Scipio now proposed were so humiliating,
that the Carthaginians would not accept them. Hannibal, therefore,
though he saw the impossibility of gaining any further advantages, was
compelled to decide the affair by a last and desperate effort. In a
personal interview between the two generals Scipio was inexorable as
to the conditions. Hannibal's army was in a bad condition; and in the
ensuing battle, to the west of Zama, the victory of Scipio was
complete. This defeat (in B.C. 202) was the death-blow to Carthage.

Scipio, on his return to Italy, was received with the greatest
enthusiasm; he entered Rome in triumph, and was henceforward
distinguished by the name of Africanus. He now for several years
continued to live at Rome, apparently without taking any part in
public affairs. In B.C. 199 he obtained the office of censor with P.
Ælius Pætus, and in B.C. 194 he was made consul a second time with
Tib. Sempronius Longus, and princeps senatus, a distinction with which
he had already been honored in B.C. 196, and which was conferred upon
him for the third time in B.C. 190. In B.C. 193, during one of the
disputes between the Carthaginians and Massinissa, Scipio was sent
with two other commissioners to mediate between the parties; but
nothing was settled, though, as Livy observes, Scipio might easily
have put an end to the disputes. Scipio was the only Roman who thought
it unworthy of the republic to support those Carthaginians who
persecuted Hannibal; and there was a tradition that Scipio, in B.C.
193, was sent on an embassy to Antiochus, and that he met Hannibal in
his exile, who in the conversation which took place, declared Scipio
the greatest of all generals. Whether the story of the conversation be
true or not, the judgment ascribed to Hannibal is just; for Scipio as
a general was second to none but Hannibal himself.

In the year B.C. 190, some discussions arose in the Senate as to what
provinces should be assigned to the two consuls, Lælius and L.
Cornelius Scipio, brother of the great Africanus. Africanus, although
he was princeps senatus, offered to accompany his brother, as legate,
if the Senate would give him Greece as his province, for this province
conferred upon Lucius the command in the war against Antiochus. The
offer was accepted, and the two brothers set out for Greece, and
thence for Asia. Africanus took his son with him on this expedition,
but by some unlucky chance the boy was taken prisoner, and sent to
Antiochus. The king offered to restore him to freedom, and to give a
considerable sum of money, if the father would interpose his influence
to obtain favorable terms for the king. Africanus refused; but the
king, notwithstanding, soon after sent the boy back to his father, who
just then was suffering from illness, and was absent from the camp. To
show his gratitude, Africanus sent a message to Antiochus, advising
him not to engage in a battle until he himself had returned to the
Roman camp. After the great battle near Mount Sipylus, Antiochus again
applied to Scipio for peace, and the latter now used his influence
with his brother Lucius and the council of war, on behalf of the king.
The conditions of the peace were tolerably mild, but they were
afterward made much more severe when the peace was ratified at Rome.

The enemies of Africanus at Rome had now another charge against him.
The peace with Antiochus, and the conditions proposed by Africanus and
his brother Lucius, were regarded by the hostile party as the result
of bribes from Antiochus, and of the liberation of the son of
Africanus. A charge was therefore brought against the two brothers, on
their return to Rome, of having accepted bribes of the king, and of
having retained a part of the treasures which they ought to have
delivered up to the ærarium. At the same time they were called upon to
give an account of the sums of money they had taken from Antiochus.
Lucius was ready to obey; but his brother Africanus with indignation
snatched the accounts from the hands of his brother and tore them to
pieces before the Senate. The tribune of the people, C. Minucius
Augurinus, however, fined Lucius; and when he was going to be thrown
into prison until he should pay the heavy fine, Africanus dragged him
away; and the tribune Tib. Gracchus, though disapproving of the
violence of Africanus, liberated Lucius from imprisonment. Africanus
himself was now summoned before the people by the tribune M. Nævius;
but instead of answering the charges he reminded the people that it
was the anniversary of his victory at Zama, and bade them rather thank
the gods for such citizens as he.

After these troubles he withdrew to his villa near Liternum, and it
was owing to the interposition of Tib. Gracchus that he was not
compelled to obey another summons. The estates of his brother Lucius,
however, were confiscated (B.C. 187), but the sum produced by their
sale did not make up the amount of the fine. His friends and clients
not only offered to make up the sum, but their generosity would even
have made him richer than he had been before; but he refused to accept
anything beyond what was absolutely necessary for his support.
Africanus never returned from his voluntary exile, and he spent the
last years of his life in quiet retirement at his villa. He is said to
have wished to be buried on his estate; but there was, as Livy says, a
tradition that he died at Rome, and was buried in the tomb of his
family near the Porta Capena, where statues of him, his brother
Lucius, and their friend Q. Ennius, were erected. The year of his
death is not quite certain; for, according to Polybius, he died in the
same year with Hannibal and Philopoemen (B.C. 183); according to
others, two years earlier (B.C. 185).

In judging of Scipio Africanus as a general, we may adopt the judgment
ascribed to Hannibal; but as a Roman citizen he is very far from
deserving such praise. His pride and haughtiness were intolerable, and
the laws of the constitution were set at nought whenever they opposed
his own views and passions. As a statesman he scarcely did anything
worth mentioning. By his wife Æmilia, daughter of Æmilius Paullus, he
had two daughters, one of whom married P. Cornelius Scipio Nasica
Corculum, the other, the celebrated Cornelia, married Tib. Sempronius
Gracchus, and was the mother of the two Gracchi, the tribunes of the
people.




CAIUS MARIUS

Extracts from "Cæsar, a Sketch," by JAMES ANTHONY FROUDE, LL.D.

(157-86 B.C.)

[Illustration: Caius Marius.]


Caius Marius was at this time forty-eight years old.[3] Two-thirds of
his life were over, and a name which was to sound throughout the world
and be remembered through all ages, had as yet been scarcely heard of
beyond the army and the political clubs in Rome. He was born at
Arpinum, a Latin township, seventy miles from the capital, in the year
157 B.C. His father was a small farmer, and he was himself bred to the
plough. He joined the army early, and soon attracted notice by his
punctual discharge of his duties. In a time of growing looseness,
Marius was strict himself in keeping discipline and in enforcing it as
he rose in the service. He was in Spain when Jugurtha[4] was there,
and made himself especially useful to Scipio; he forced his way
steadily upward, by his mere soldierlike qualities, to the rank of
military tribune. Rome, too, had learnt to know him, for he was chosen
tribune of the people the year after the murder of Caius Gracchus.
Being a self-made man, he belonged naturally to the popular party.
While in office he gave offence in some way to the men in power, and
was called before the Senate to answer for himself. But he had the
right on his side, it is likely, for they found him stubborn and
impertinent, and they could make nothing of their charges against him.
He was not bidding at this time, however, for the support of the mob.
He had the integrity and sense to oppose the largesses of corn; and he
forfeited his popularity by trying to close the public granaries
before the practice had passed into a system. He seemed as if made of
a block of hard Roman oak, gnarled and knotted, but sound in all its
fibres. His professional merit continued to recommend him. At the age
of forty he became prætor, and was sent to Spain, where he left a mark
again by the successful severity by which he cleared the province of
banditti. He was a man neither given himself to talking, nor much
talked about in the world; but he was sought for wherever work was to
be done, and he had made himself respected and valued in high circles,
for after his return from the Peninsula he had married into one of the
most distinguished of the patrician families.

         [Footnote 3: B.C. 109.]

         [Footnote 4: King of Numidia. He successfully withstood the
         Romans during several years.]

Marius by this marriage became a person of social consideration. His
father had been a client of the Metelli; and Cæcilius Metellus, who
must have known Marius by reputation and probably in person, invited
him to go as second in command in the African campaign. He was
moderately successful. Towns were taken, battles were won: Metellus
was incorruptible, and the Numidians sued for peace. But Jugurtha
wanted terms, and the consul demanded unconditional surrender.
Jugurtha withdrew into the desert; the war dragged on; and Marius,
perhaps ambitious, perhaps impatient at the general's want of vigor,
began to think that he could make quicker work of it. The popular
party were stirring again in Rome, the Senate having so notoriously
disgraced itself. There was just irritation that a petty African
prince could defy the whole power of Rome for so many years; and
though a democratic consul had been unheard of for a century, the name
of Marius began to be spoken of as a possible candidate. Marius
consented to stand. The law required that he must be present in person
at the election, and he applied to his commander for leave of absence.
Metellus laughed at his pretensions, and bade him wait another twenty
years. Marius, however, persisted, and was allowed to go. The
patricians strained their resources to defeat him, but he was chosen
with enthusiasm. Metellus was recalled, and the conduct of the
Numidian war was assigned to the new hero of the "Populares."

A shudder of alarm ran, no doubt, through the Senate house, when the
determination of the people was known. A successful general could not
be disposed of so easily as oratorical tribunes. Fortunately, Marius
was not a politician. He had no belief in democracy. He was a soldier,
and had a soldier's way of thinking on government and the methods of
it. His first step was a reformation in the army. Hitherto the Roman
legions had been no more than the citizens in arms, called for the
moment from their various occupations, to return to them when the
occasion for their services was past. Marius had perceived that fewer
men, better trained and disciplined, could be made more effective and
be more easily handled. He had studied war as a science. He had
perceived that the present weakness need be no more than an accident,
and that there was a latent force in the Roman state, which needed
only organization to resume its ascendency. "He enlisted," it was
said, "the worst of the citizens," men, that is to say, who had no
occupation, and who became soldiers by profession; and as persons
without property could not have furnished themselves at their own
cost, he must have carried out the scheme proposed by Gracchus, and
equipped them at the expense of the state. His discipline was of the
sternest. The experiment was new; and men of rank who had a taste for
war in earnest, and did not wish that the popular party should have
the whole benefit and credit of the improvements, were willing to go
with him; among them a dissipated young patrician, called Lucius
Sulla, whose name also was destined to be memorable.

By these methods, and out of these materials, an army was formed, such
as no Roman general had hitherto led. It performed extraordinary
marches, carried its water-supplies with it in skins, and followed the
enemy across sandy deserts hitherto found impassable. In less than two
years the war was over. The Moors, to whom Jugurtha had fled,
surrendered him to Sulla; and he was brought in chains to Rome, where
he finished his life in a dungeon.

Marius had formed an army barely in time to save Italy from being
totally overwhelmed. A vast migratory wave of population had been set
in motion behind the Rhine and the Danube. The German forests were
uncultivated. The hunting and pasture grounds were too straight for
the numbers crowded into them, and two enormous hordes were rolling
westward and southward in search of some new abiding-place. Each
division consisted of hundreds of thousands. They travelled, with
their wives and children, their wagons, as with the ancient Scythians
and with the modern South African Dutch, being at once their
conveyance and their home. Gray-haired priestesses tramped along among
them, barefooted, in white linen dresses, the knife at their girdle;
northern Iphigenias, sacrificing prisoners as they were taken, to the
gods of Valhalla. On they swept, eating up the country, and the people
flying before them. In 113 B.C. the skirts of the Cimbri had
encountered a small Roman force near Trieste, and destroyed it. Four
years later another attempt was made to stop them, but the Roman army
was beaten and its camp taken. The Cimbrian host did not, however,
turn at that time upon Italy. Their aim was the south of France. They
made their way through the Alps into Switzerland, where the Helvetii
joined them and the united mass rolled over the Jura and down the bank
of the Rhone. Roused at last into the exertion, the Senate sent into
Gaul the largest force which the Romans had ever brought into the
field. They met the Cimbri at Orange, and were simply annihilated.
Eighty thousand Romans and forty thousand camp-followers were said to
have fallen. The numbers in such cases are generally exaggerated, but
the extravagance of the report is a witness to the greatness of the
overthrow. The Romans had received a worse blow than at Cannæ. They
were brave enough, but they were commanded by persons whose
recommendations for command were birth or fortune; "preposterous men,"
as Marius termed them, who had waited for their appointment to open
the military manuals.

Had the Cimbri chosen at this moment to recross the Alps into Italy,
they had only to go and take possession, and Alaric would have been
antedated by five centuries. In great danger it was the Senate's
business to suspend the constitution. The constitution was set aside
now, but it was set aside by the people themselves, not by the Senate.
One man only could save the country, and that man was Marius. His
consulship was over, and custom forbade his re-election. The Senate
might have appointed him Dictator, but would not. The people, custom
or no custom, chose him consul a second time--a significant
acknowledgment that the Empire, which had been won by the sword, must
be held by the sword, and that the sword itself must be held by the
hand that was best fitted to use it. Marius first triumphed for his
African victory, and, as an intimation to the Senate that the power
for the moment was his and not theirs, he entered the Curia in his
triumphal dress. He then prepared for the barbarians who, to the
alarmed imagination of the city, were already knocking at its gates.
Time was the important element in the matter. Had the Cimbri come at
once after their victory at Orange, Italy had been theirs. But they
did not come. With the unguided movements of some wild force of
nature, they swerved away through Aquitaine to the Pyrenees. They
swept across the mountains into Spain. Thence, turning north, they
passed up the Atlantic coast and round to the Seine, the Gauls flying
before them; thence on to the Rhine, where the vast body of the
Teutons joined them, and fresh detachments of the Helvetii. It was as
if some vast tide-wave had surged over the country and rolled through
it, searching out the easiest passages. At length, in two divisions,
the invaders moved definitely toward Italy, the Cimbri following their
old tracks by the Eastern Alps toward Aquileia and the Adriatic, the
Teutons passing down through Provence, and making for the road along
the Mediterranean. Two years had been consumed in these wanderings,
and Marius was by this time ready for them. The Senate had dropped the
reins, and no longer governed or misgoverned; the popular party,
represented by the army, was supreme. Marius was continued in office,
and was a fourth time consul. He had completed his military reforms,
and the army was now a professional service, with regular pay. Trained
corps of engineers were attached to each legion. The campaigns of the
Romans were thenceforward to be conducted with spade and pickaxe as
much as with sword and javelin, and the soldiers learnt the use of
tools as well as arms.

The effect of the change was like enchantment. The delay of the
Germans made it unnecessary to wait for them in Italy. Leaving
Catulus, his colleague in the consulship, to check the Cimbri in
Venetia, Marius went himself, taking Sulla with him, into the south of
France. As the barbarian host came on, he occupied a fortified camp
near Aix. He allowed the enormous procession to roll past him in their
wagons toward the Alps. Then, following cautiously, he watched his
opportunity to fall on them. The Teutons were brave, but they had no
longer mere legionaries to fight with, but a powerful machine, and the
entire mass of them, men, women, and children, in numbers which,
however uncertain, were rather those of a nation than an army, were
swept out of existence. The Teutons were destroyed on the 20th of
July, 102. In the year following, the same fate overtook their
comrades. The Cimbri had forced the passes through the mountains. They
had beaten the unscientific patrician Catulus, and had driven him back
on the Po. But Marius came to his rescue. The Cimbri were cut to
pieces near Mantua, in the summer of 101, and Italy was saved.

The victories of Marius mark a new epoch in Roman history.[5] The
legions were no longer the levy of the citizens in arms, who were
themselves the state for which they fought. The legionaries were
citizens still. They had votes, and they used them; but they were
professional soldiers with the modes of thought which belong to
soldiers; and besides, the power of the hustings was now the power of
the sword. The constitution remained to appearance intact, and means
were devised sufficient to encounter, it might be supposed, the new
danger. Standing armies were prohibited in Italy. Victorious generals
returning from campaigns abroad were required to disband their legions
on entering the sacred soil. But the materials of these legions
remained a distinct order from the rest of the population, capable of
instant combination, and in combination, irresistible, save by
opposing combinations of the same kind.

         [Footnote 5: He was ranked with Romulus and Camillus and
         given the title of the third founder of Rome.]

The danger from the Germans was no sooner gone than political anarchy
broke loose again. Marius, the man of the people, was the saviour of
his country. He was made consul a fifth time, and a sixth. The party
which had given him his command shared, of course, in his
pre-eminence. The elections could be no longer interfered with or the
voters intimidated. The public offices were filled with the most
violent agitators, who believed that the time had come to revenge the
Gracchi, and carry out the democratic revolution, to establish the
ideal Republic, and the direct rule of the citizen assembly. This,
too, was a chimera. If the Roman Senate could not govern, far less
could the Roman mob govern. Marius stood aside, and let the voices
rage. He could not be expected to support a system which had brought
the country so near to ruin. He had no belief in the visions of the
demagogues, but the time was not ripe to make an end of it all. Had he
tried, the army would not have gone with him; so he sat still, till
faction had done its work. The popular heroes of the hour were the
tribune Saturninus and the prætor Glaucia. They carried corn laws and
land laws--whatever laws they pleased to propose. The administration
remaining with the Senate, they carried a vote that every senator
should take an oath to execute their laws under penalty of fine and
expulsion. Marius did not like it, and even opposed it, but let it
pass at last.

Marius was an indifferent politician. He perceived as well as any one
that violence must not go on, but he hesitated to put it down. He knew
that the aristocracy feared and hated him. Between them and the
people's consul no alliance was possible. He did not care to alienate
his friends, and there may have been other difficulties which we do
not know, in his way. The army itself was perhaps divided. On the
popular side there were two parties: a moderate one, represented by
Memmius, who, as tribune, had impeached the senators for the
Jugurthine infamies; the other, the advanced radicals, led by Glaucia
and Saturninus. Memmius and Glaucia were both candidates for the
consulship; and as Memmius was likely to succeed, he was murdered.

Above the tumults of the factions in the Capitol a cry rising into
shrillness began to be heard from Italy. Caius Gracchus had wished to
extend the Roman franchise to the Italian states, and the suggestion
had cost him his popularity and his life. The Italian provinces had
furnished their share of the armies which had beaten Jugurtha, and had
destroyed the German invaders. They now demanded that they should have
the position which Gracchus designed for them: that they should be
allowed to legislate for themselves, and no longer lie at the mercy of
others, who neither understood their necessities, nor cared for their
interests. They had no friends in the city, save a few far-sighted
statesmen. Senate and mob had at least one point of agreement, that
the spoils of the Empire should be fought for among themselves; and at
the first mention of the invasion of their monopoly a law was passed
making the very agitation of the subject punishable by death.

The contrast of character between two classes of population, became at
once uncomfortably evident. The provincials had been the right arm of
the Empire. Rome, a city of rich men with families of slaves, and of a
crowd of impoverished freemen without employment to keep them in
health and strength, could no longer bring into the field a force
which could hold its ground against the gentry and peasants of
Samnium. The Senate enlisted Greeks, Numidians, any one whose services
they could purchase. They had to encounter soldiers who had been
trained and disciplined by Marius, and they were taught, by defeat
upon defeat, that they had a worse enemy before them than the Germans.
Marius himself had almost withdrawn from public life. He had no heart
for the quarrel, and did not care greatly to exert himself. At the
bottom, perhaps, he thought that the Italians were in the right. The
Senate discovered that they were helpless, and must come to terms if
they would escape destruction. They abandoned the original point of
difference, and they offered to open the franchise to every Italian
state south of the Po, which had not taken arms, or which returned
immediately to its allegiance. The war had broken out for a definite
cause. When the cause was removed no reason remained for its
continuance.

The panting Senate was thus able to breathe again. The war continued,
but under better auspices. Sound material could now be collected again
for the army. Marius being in the background, the chosen knight of the
aristocracy, Lucius Sulla, whose fame in the Cimbrian war had been
only second to that of his commander's, came at once to the front. Too
late the democratic leaders repented of their folly in encouraging the
Senate to refuse the franchise to the Italians. The Italians, they
began to perceive, would be their surest political allies. Caius
Gracchus had been right after all. The Roman democracy must make haste
to offer the Italians more than all which the Senate was ready to
concede to them. Together they could make an end of misrule, and place
Marius once more at their head.

Much of this was perhaps the scheming passion of revolution; much of
it was legitimate indignation, penitent for its errors and anxious to
atone for them. Marius had his personal grievances. The aristocrats
were stealing from him even his military reputation, and claiming for
Sulla the capture of Jugurtha. He was willing, perhaps anxious, to
take the Eastern command. Sulpicius Rufus, once a champion of the
Senate and the most brilliant orator in Rome, went over to the people
in the excitement. Rufus was chosen tribune, and at once proposed to
enfranchise the remainder of Italy.

But Sulla was not so easily got rid of. It was no time for nice
considerations. He had formed an army in Campania out of the legions
which had served against the Italians. He had made his soldiers
devoted to him. They were ready to go anywhere and do anything which
Sulla bade them. After so many murders, and so many commotions, the
constitution had lost its sacred character; a popular assembly was, of
all conceivable bodies, the least fit to govern an empire; and in
Sulla's eyes the Senate, whatever its deficiencies, was the only
possible sovereign of Rome. The people were a rabble, and their voices
the clamor of fools, who must be taught to know their masters. His
reply to Sulpicius and to the vote for his recall, was to march on the
city. He led his troops within the circle which no legionary in arms
was allowed to enter, and he lighted his watch-fires in the Forum
itself. The people resisted; Sulpicius was killed; Marius, the saviour
of his country, had to fly for his life, pursued by assassins, with a
price set upon his head.[6] Twelve of the prominent popular leaders
were immediately executed without trial; and in hot haste, swift,
decisive measures were taken, which permanently, as Sulla hoped, or if
not permanently, at least for the moment, would lame the limbs of the
democracy.

         [Footnote 6: According to legend Marius took refuge among the
         ruins of Carthage, comparing his own fallen greatness to that
         of the city. His dignity in misfortune awed the soldiers who
         came to seize him, and they left him in peace.]

He was no sooner out of Italy than the democratic party rose, with
Cinna at their head, to demand the restoration of the old
constitution. Cinna had been sworn to maintain Sulla's reforms, but no
oath could be held binding which was extorted at the sword's point. A
fresh Sulpicius was found in Carbo, a popular tribune. A more valuable
supporter was found in Quintus Sertorius, a soldier of fortune, but a
man of real gifts, and even of genius. Disregarding the new obligation
to obtain the previous consent of the Senate, Cinna called the
assembly together to repeal the acts which Sulla had forced on them.

The wounds of the social war were scarcely cicatrized, and the peace
had left the allies imperfectly satisfied. Their dispersed armies
gathered again about Cinna and Sertorius. Old Marius, who had been
hunted through marsh and forest, and had been hiding with difficulty
in Africa, came back at the news that Italy had risen again; and six
thousand of his veterans flocked to him at the sound of his name. The
Senate issued proclamations. The limitations on the Italian franchise
left by Sulla were abandoned. Every privilege which had been asked for
was conceded. It was too late. Concessions made in fear might be
withdrawn on the return of safety. Marius and Cinna joined their
forces. The few troops in the pay of the Senate deserted to them. They
appeared together at the gates of the city, and Rome capitulated.

There was a bloody score to be wiped out. Marius bears the chief blame
for the scenes which followed. Undoubtedly he was in no pleasant
humor. A price had been set on his head, his house had been destroyed,
his property had been confiscated, he himself had been chased like a
wild beast, and he had not deserved such treatment. He had saved Italy
when but for him it would have been wasted by the swords of the
Germans. His power had afterward been absolute, but he had not abused
it for party purposes. The Senate had no reason to complain of him. He
had touched none of their privileges, incapable and dishonest as he
knew them to be. His crime in their eyes had been his eminence. They
had now shown themselves as cruel as they were worthless; and if
public justice was disposed to make an end of them, he saw no cause
for interference.

Thus the familiar story repeated itself: wrong was punished by wrong,
and another item was entered on the bloody account which was being
scored up year after year. The noble lords and their friends had
killed the people in the Forum. They were killed in turn by the
soldiers of Marius. Fifty senators perished, not those who were
specially guilty, but those who were most politically marked as
patrician leaders. With them fell a thousand equites, commoners of
fortune, who had thrown in their lot with the aristocracy. From
retaliatory political revenge the transition was easy to pillage and
wholesale murder; and for many days the wretched city was made a prey
to robbers and cut-throats.

So ended the year 87, the darkest and bloodiest which the guilty city
had yet experienced. Marius and Cinna were chosen consuls for the year
ensuing, and a witches' prophecy was fulfilled, that Marius should
have a seventh consulate. But the glory had departed from him. His sun
was already setting, redly, among crimson clouds. He lived but a
fortnight after his inauguration, and he died in his bed on the 13th
of January, at the age of seventy-one.

"The mother of the Gracchi," said Mirabeau, "cast the dust of her
murdered sons into the air, and out of it sprang Caius Marius."




JULIUS CÆSAR

By E. SPENCER BEESLY, M.A.

(100-44 B.C.)

[Illustration: Julius Cæsar.]


Rome solved the great political problem of the ancient world in the
best practicable, if not in the best conceivable, way. To Cæsar it
fell to put the crowning stroke to that work. The several states of
modern Europe have all contributed, though in different degrees, to
political progress, and therefore no one of them has the unique
importance and glory that belongs to Rome. For the same reason, no
modern statesman stands on a level with Cæsar. He remains, in
Shakespeare's phrase, "the foremost man of all this world." It was the
high fortune of Rome that, in the principal crisis of her history, she
possessed a citizen so splendidly endowed in intellect, character, and
heart. Free to an extraordinary degree from the prejudices belonging
to his age and country, with piercing and far-sweeping vision, he saw
as from some superior height, the political situation of his own time
in its relation to the past and the future of the ancient world. If
Rome had till then carried out the work of conquest with considerable
method, and upon the whole, with steadiness, she had very inadequately
satisfied the need for incorporation. Her oligarchical constitution,
admirably adapted for the first task, could not easily reconcile
itself to the second. In its best days, and while Carthage and Macedon
were still formidable, the Senate had from time to time, prudently
though grudgingly, extended the privilege of citizenship to some of
the subject Italian states. But the great mass of Italians had only
extorted it by rebellion during the boyhood of Cæsar, and outside
Italy, the conquered nations were still on the footing of subject
allies, trampled upon and fleeced for the benefit of Rome, or rather
of the Roman nobles and capitalists. If the great dominion was to be
maintained in some tolerable degree of well-being for all its members,
or even maintained at all, it was absolutely necessary that the
so-called Republican constitution, always oppressive for the
provinces, and now shamefully corrupt, should be replaced by personal
government. For a complete incorporation of the subject peoples was
not to be expected from the suffrages of a dominant people, to even
the poorest of whom, it would mean the cessation of highly prized
privileges and immunities. The provinces would from the earliest
moment of their subjection have welcomed such a change. The time was
more than ripe for it when the Roman world lay at the feet of Sulla.
Sulla had all the ability, self-reliance, prestige, and opportunity
that were needed. But his moral nature was below the task. He had
neither the insight, nor the sympathy, nor the noble ambition of
Cæsar, and he preferred to re-establish the senatorial oligarchy.

[Illustration: Marius on the ruins of Carthage.]

When Sulla crushed the Marian party Cæsar had just arrived at manhood.
Though of an old patrician house, he had yet a family connection with
the democratic party, Marius having married his aunt. He himself had
married a daughter of the democratic leader Cinna, and for refusing to
divorce her he was proscribed by Sulla, but managed to keep in hiding
till the storm was past. After the death of the great reactionist
(B.C. 78), he seized every opportunity of reviving the spirit of the
popular party; as, for instance, by publicly honoring the memory of
Marius, bringing to justice murderers of the proscription, and
courageously raising his single voice in the Senate against the
illegal execution of Catiline's partisans (B.C. 63). Clearly seeing
the necessity for personal government, at a time when his own services
and distinctions were not such as to entitle him to aspire to it,
Cæsar did his best to secure it for Pompey, then far the foremost man
in Rome, by strenuously supporting measures which virtually placed the
empire at his absolute disposal for an indefinite period. A fairly
good soldier, but a most vain, unreliable, and incompetent statesman,
Pompey after five years let these powers slip through his hands.

[Illustration: Julius Cæsar.]

Cæsar was by this time thirty-eight (B.C. 62). He had steadily risen
in influence and official rank; and it was, no doubt, now that he
determined to take the great task into his own hands. He was the
recognized chief of the popular party, which aimed at concentrating
Republican government in the hands of a single person, as the only
means of bridling the oligarchy. But this was not to be accomplished
merely by popular votes, as many a democratic leader had found to his
cost. Cæsar needed an army and a military reputation, and with rare
patience he set himself to acquire both. By a coalition with
Pompey--now obliged to treat him as an equal--he obtained the
consulship (B.C. 59), which on its expiration entitled him to a great
military command.

Roman generals had of late preferred to extend their conquests
eastward, and to win comparatively easy and lucrative triumphs in
Asia, over people who had possessed for long ages a type of
civilization suited to them, and who therefore could never thoroughly
assimilate Western manners and institutions. All this time Gaul, lying
at the gates of Italy, was neglected (only the district between the
Cevennes and the Alps having been reduced), because the people were
more warlike, and less booty was to be gained. Yet, till that conquest
should be effected, Rome's work of civilizing the world was standing
still; nay, it was always menaced by northern invasions. This field of
action, then, Cæsar marked out for himself, in which he could prepare
the means for assuming power at home, and at the same time render the
highest service to his country and humanity. His ardent spirit, his
incredible energy in all circumstances of his life, astonished his
contemporaries. Time pressed, for he was no longer young. While he was
absent from Rome, what revolutions might not mar his plans! Yet, ten
continuous years did he devote to this great task, which, if he had
achieved nothing else, would make his name one of the greatest in
history. In those ten years he conquered Gaul, from the Pyrenees to
the Rhine and the British Channel; conquered her so thoroughly, and
treated her so sensibly, that when the fierce struggle was over, she
frankly and even proudly accepted her new position. The culture, the
institutions, even the language of the victors, were eagerly adopted.
The grandsons of the men who had fought so gallantly against Cæsar,
won full citizenship, took their seats in the Senate, and commanded
Roman armies.

These ten years decided the future of the West, and therefore of
Humanity. It is not merely the central position and natural advantages
of France, nor yet the admirable qualities of her people, which have
made her throughout mediæval and modern history, the foremost of
European states. It is even more the result of her rapid and thorough
acceptance of Roman civilization. This made her the heir of Rome. This
enabled her, long afterward, to Romanize Germany and England in some
degree, and as it were at second-hand, by the arms of Charlemagne and
William.

It had been arranged between Cæsar and Pompey, that during the absence
of the former in Gaul, the latter should act with the popular party,
and keep the nobility in the condition of impotence to which it had
been reduced in the consulship of Cæsar. Partly from jealousy of
Cæsar, partly from sheer incapacity, Pompey, after much vacillation
and duplicity, finally allied himself with the nobles, thinking with
their aid to crush his rival and thereafter to be supreme. The nobles,
for their part, thought they would know how to deal with Pompey if
once Cæsar was out of the way. In the negotiations which preceded the
civil war, Cæsar showed a moderation and fairness in striking contrast
with the unscrupulous and headstrong violence of the nobles, who had
not even formal legality on their side. But when he was finally
summoned to hand over his province and army to a nominee of the
Senate, on pain of being declared a public enemy, and when the
tribunes who had reversed the resolution of the Senate were obliged to
fly for their lives to his camp, he suddenly crossed the river
Rubicon, the boundary of his province, and marched on Rome (B.C. 49).

He had but one legion with him; the bulk of his army was far away in
its Gallic cantonments. The forces of Pompey were overwhelmingly
superior in numbers. But the rapid and daring advance of Cæsar
prevented their concentration. He came, not merely the adored general
of a veteran army, but the long-tried and consistent leader of the
liberal party, who had never swerved from his principles, never
betrayed his friends, never flinched from dangers. Fascinated by his
success and encouraged by his clemency, towns everywhere opened their
gates and Pompeian levies joined him, swelling his army at every stage
as he swept down Italy.

Pompey, for his part, was not sorry to have a pretext for moving
eastward toward the scene of his early triumphs, where his military
prestige and his personal influence would cause all the client states
to rally round him, and the sulky and suspicious nobles would find
themselves overshadowed. So he crossed the Adriatic, leaving the large
veteran army in Spain, which was under his orders, to take care of
itself. Thither Cæsar proceeded as soon as he had secured Italy, bent
on making sure of the West before doing anything else. When the
Spanish legions were beaten, he lost no time in following Pompey, who
had found the respite all too short for drilling his large but raw
force of Romans, and organizing the masses of Asiatics whom he had
summoned to his standard. In the campaign that ensued, the conqueror
of the East fully maintained his old military reputation; but at
length, driven by the clamor of the nobles to risk a pitched battle,
he suffered a crushing defeat on the field of Pharsalia (B.C. 48).
Flying to Egypt, still an independent kingdom, he was assassinated by
order of the government.

The beaten party rallied again, first in Africa, then in Spain; and of
the three years and nine months of life that remained to Cæsar, much
the greater portion was spent at the head of his army. He, therefore,
had not time to give any complete organization to his new government.
But his intentions are clearly discernible in outline. Supreme power,
legislative as well as executive, was to be vested in a single ruler,
governing not by divine right, but as the representative of the
community, and in its interest. This was indeed an ideal by no means
novel to Romans. Scipio had brooded over it. Caius Gracchus had for a
moment realized it. The oldest institutions and traditions told of it.
It was the power of the ancient kings theoretically continued to, and
in grave emergencies actually exercised by, the magistrates of the
Republic during its best days. It had been increasingly overshadowed
by the Senate. That body was now to be reduced to its original
consultative office. The functions of the executive had been gradually
divided among several magistrates. They were now to be re-concentrated.
Above all, annual election--the cherished institution of all
oligarchies, open or disguised--was to be replaced by life-tenure,
with power to name a successor. The subjects of Rome were to be
admitted to citizenship, wherever and whenever fit for it; and there
is reason to believe that Cæsar intended to move much faster in this
direction than his successor did. Rome itself, from the mistress of
the Empire, was to become its capital and most dignified municipality.
All old parties--Cæsar's own included--were to consider themselves at
an end. "To the victors the spoils!" was a cry rebuked from the first.
For the vanquished of Pharsalia there was not only amnesty, but
admission to the highest grades of the public service, if they would
bury their old grudge and recognize the government. Pauperism among
the lower class, and insolvency among the upper--ulcers not admitting
of a radical cure--were treated with judicious palliatives. Taxation
was reduced, expenditure was increased, and yet the balance in the
treasury at Cæsar's death was tenfold what it had ever been before--a
proof of the frightful waste and corruption from which the Roman world
was rescued by the overthrow of the oligarchy.

Of the administrative work of Cæsar it is impossible here to give any
adequate idea. A reform of the calendar, which served the West till
1582, and serves Russia still; a recasting of the whole provincial
administration; a codification of Roman law; a census of the Empire; a
uniform gold coinage; a public library; a metropolitan police;
building regulations; sanitary regulations; an alteration of the
course of the Tiber, which would have drained the marshes--all these
grand projects, and more, some carried to completion, some only
sketched out, teemed from the active brain of the great organizer, in
the brief moments he could spare from military cares in these last
months of his life--a devouring activity, an all-embracing capacity,
such as perhaps never shone forth in man before or since. What Roman
incorporation meant for the ancient world was at last revealed. The
war havoc of seven centuries had found its justification.

[Illustration: The Ides of March.]

In the midst of this glorious and beneficent career, at the age of
fifty-five (57?), Cæsar, whose frank and fearless spirit disdained
suspicion or precaution, was assassinated by a knot of rancorous,
perfidious aristocrats, whom he had pardoned and promoted. Their
purblind spite was powerless to avert the inevitable advent of
monocracy. What they did effectually extinguish for more than a
century, was the possibility of amnesty, conciliation, and mutual
confidence. Careless as usual of historical truth, the great English
poet has glorified the murderers of Cæsar. Dante, never forgetting the
moral responsibility of art, has reserved the lowest circle of hell
for Brutus, Cassius, and Judas Iscariot.

It imports little to the greatness of such a one as Cæsar, to add that
in an age of oratory he stood in the first rank of orators; that his
historical writings are an unrivalled model of vigor, lucidity, and
elegance; that he carried his scientific culture to a point very
unusual among his countrymen; and that his personal prowess and feats
of endurance were the admiration of veteran soldiers. Women loved him,
and he loved them. Enjoying life thoroughly, he was temperate in all
things. To no man has it been given to approach more nearly to the
perfection of human nature--complete, evenly balanced, and
self-controlled.




MARC ANTONY

(83-30 B.C.)

[Illustration: Marc Antony.]


Marcus Antonius, or Marc Antony, grandson of Antonius the orator, and
son of Antonius Creticus, seems to have been born about 83 B.C. While
still a child he lost his father, whose example however, had he been
spared, would have done little for the improvement of his character.
Brought up under the influence of the disreputable Cornelius Lentulus
Sura, whom his mother had married, Antony spent his youth in
profligacy and extravagance. For a time he co-operated with the
reprobate Clodius in his political plans, chiefly, it is supposed,
through hostility to Cicero, who had caused Lentulus, his stepfather,
to be put to death as one of the Catiline conspirators; but he soon
withdrew from the connection, on account of a disagreement which,
appropriately enough, arose in regard to his relations to his
associate's wife, Flavia. Not long after, in 58 B.C., he fled to
Greece, to escape the importunity of his creditors; and at length,
after a short time spent in attendance on the philosophers at Athens,
found an occasion for displaying some of the better features of his
character, in the wars that were being carried on by Gabinius against
Aristobulus in Palestine, and in support of Ptolemy Auletes in Egypt.

A new chapter in his life was opened by the visit which he made to
Julius Cæsar in Gaul (54 B.C.). Welcomed by the victorious general as
a valuable assistant in his ambitious designs, and raised by his
influence to the offices of quæstor, augur, and tribune of the plebes,
he displayed admirable boldness and activity in the maintenance of his
patron's cause, in opposition to the violence and intrigues of the
oligarchical party. At length his antagonists prevailed, and expelled
him from the curia; and the political contest became a civil war. The
Rubicon was crossed; Cæsar was victorious, and Antony shared in his
triumph. Deputy-governor of Italy during Cæsar's absence in Spain
(49), second in command in the decisive battle of Pharsalia (48), and
again deputy-governor of Italy while Cæsar was in Africa (47), Antony
was now inferior in power only to the dictator himself, and eagerly
seized the opportunity of indulging in the most extravagant excesses
of luxurious licentiousness--excesses which Cicero depicted in the
"Philippics" with all the elaborate eloquence of political hatred. In
46 he seems to have taken offence at Cæsar, because he insisted on
payment for the property of Pompey which Antony professedly had
purchased, but had merely appropriated. But the estrangement was not
of long continuance, for we find Antony meeting the dictator at Narbo
the following year, and rejecting the advances of Trebonius, who
endeavored to discover if there was any hope of getting Antony to join
in the conspiracy that was already on foot. In 44 he was consul along
with Cæsar, and seconded his ambition by the famous offer of the crown
on the 15th of February, thus unconsciously preparing the way for the
tragedy on the 15th of March. To the sincerity of his adherence to
Cæsar, the conspirators themselves bore witness on that memorable day,
by the care which they took to keep him engaged without, while the
daggers were doing their work within.

This was the second great epoch in Antony's life. A brighter prospect
than ever was then opened to his ambition. By his eloquence--a
hereditary gift--he managed to stir up the minds of the populace
against the assassins of Cæsar, and drove them from the city. He made
peace with the remaining representatives of the senatorial party, and
seemed almost to have succeeded to the power and position of his
unfortunate patron. But the youthful Octavius, whom Cæsar had adopted
as his son, arrived from Illyria, and claimed the inheritance of his
"father." Agreement was impossible, and war ensued. Octavius obtained
the support of the Senate and of Cicero; and the veteran troops of the
dictator flocked to his standard. Antony was denounced as a public
enemy; and the city gave its loudest applause to the tirades of his
most eloquent accuser. His cause gradually lost ground, and seemed to
be totally ruined when his army was defeated in the siege of Mutina
(43 B.C.). But escaping to Cisalpine Gaul, he formed a junction with
Lepidus, and they marched toward Rome with 17 legions and 10,000
cavalry.

The wily Octavius now betrayed his party, and entered into terms with
Antony and Lepidus. It was agreed that they three should adopt the
title--so beautifully ironical--of _Triumviri reipublicæ
constituendæ_, and share the power and the provinces among them. Gaul
was to be Antony's; Spain fell to the lot of Lepidus, and Africa,
Sardinia, and Sicily were to belong to Octavius. A conjunct
proscription followed, each of the partners in the villanous design
bartering the life of his friends, for the pleasure of destroying his
foes. The detested author of the "Philippics" was given up to Antony's
revenge; and, according to Appian, the number of the victims amounted
to 300 senators and 2,000 knights. In the following year Antony and
Octavius proceeded against the conspirators, Cassius and Brutus, who
still maintained themselves in Macedonia; and, in the battles of
Philippi, stamped out the last embers of republican Rome.

While Octavius returned to Italy, Antony proceeded to Greece, and
thence to Asia Minor, for the sake of recruiting his funds, completing
the subjugation of the Eastern provinces, and obtaining satisfaction
about the conduct of the Egyptian queen during the recent contest. On
his passage through Cilicia, in 41, he was visited by Cleopatra, who
came to answer the charges in person. She sailed up the Cydnus in a
gorgeous bark, with a fantastic and brilliant equipage, and brought
all her allurements to bear on the heart of the voluptuous Roman. Her
success was complete; and he who was to have been her judge, was led
captive to Alexandria as her slave. All was forgotten in the
fascination and delight of the passing hour; and feasting and revelry
found perpetual and ever-varying renewal.

At length Antony was aroused by the Parthian invasion of Syria, and
the report of an outbreak between Fulvia, his wife, and Lucius, his
brother, on the one hand, and Octavius on the other. On arriving in
Italy he found that the war was over, and Octavius the victor; and the
chief cause of disagreement being soon after removed by the death of
Fulvia, a reconciliation was speedily effected between the triumvirs,
and cemented by the marriage of Antony with Octavia, the sister of his
colleague. A new division of the Roman world was agreed on at
Brundusium, Lepidus receiving Africa, Octavius the West, and Antony
the East.

Returning to his province, Antony was for a time successful; his
general, Ventidius, beating the Parthians, and Socius capturing
Jerusalem and conquering Antigonus. But after another visit to Italy,
during which the triumvirate was prolonged for five years, Antony sent
away his wife, yielded himself completely to the evil influence of
Cleopatra, indulged not only in licentiousness, but in tyranny, and
allowed his affairs to be neglected or delayed. An expedition against
the Parthians was a failure; but for this, his success against
Artavasdes, the Armenian king, in some measure compensated. Octavius
at length determined to get rid of Antony, and had little need of
invention to bring charges sufficient against him. About two years
were spent in preparations and delays on both sides, and it was not
till the year 31 that the fate of Antony was decided by the battle of
Actium.

Defeated and deserted, he once more sought refuge and repose in the
society of Cleopatra, but was followed even there by his relentless
rival. At first he made a gallant effort to defend himself, and
partially succeeded. But convinced of the hopelessness of his
position, and assured of the suicide of his mistress, he followed the
example which he was falsely informed she had given (30 B.C.). Antony
had been married in succession to Fadia, Antonia, Fulvia, and Octavia,
and left behind him a number of children. A short but vivid sketch of
Antony is given by De Quincey in his "Essay on the Cæsars."




HERMANN

(16 B.C.-21 A.D.)

[Illustration: Hermann.]


Hermann, the Arminius of the Roman historians, the son of Sigimer,
chief of the Cherusci, was born about B.C. 16 or 17. Being sent in
early youth as a hostage to Rome, probably in consequence of the
victories of Drusus, which had established the supremacy of Rome over
the Catti, Cherusci, and other tribes of North Germany, he obtained
the favor of Augustus, and was inscribed among the Roman knights. On
his return to his native country, he resolved to deliver it from the
Romans, whose oppression had become intolerable. Quintilius Varus, a
rapacious man, was then the Roman governor in Germany. He had held
office in Syria, where he had ruled with great harshness; and fancying
that he might act in the same way toward the fierce tribes of the
North, he roused among them a bitter hatred of the Romans.

[Illustration: Hermann's triumph over the Romans.]

They found in Hermann a leader of extraordinary bravery and resource.
He laid his plans with the chiefs of the Catti, Bructeri, and other
tribes that lived between the Rhine and the Albis (Elbe), some of
which broke out into insurrection. Hermann then offered Varus his
assistance in reducing them to subjection, and thus led him to advance
some distance from the Rhine into the interior. Varus began his march
with three legions, six cohorts, and a body of cavalry, and Hermann
served him as a guide through the wilds. The Romans were thus drawn
into an ambuscade in the Teutoburg forest, and found themselves all at
once surrounded by numerous bodies of Germans, who were directed by
Hermann himself. The Romans fought desperately; but being
unacquainted with the localities, and unable to form their ranks owing
to the thickness of the forests and the marshy nature of the ground,
they were defeated after a three days' battle, by the Germans, who
destroyed them in detail. At last, Varus, being wounded and seeing no
chance of escape, fell upon his sword, and the other chief officers
followed his example.

The legions were entirely destroyed, and the cavalry alone cut their
way through the enemy and regained the banks of the Rhine. By this
defeat the Romans lost all their conquests beyond that river; and
although Germanicus some years after again carried their arms to the
Weser, they never established anything like a solid dominion over
those regions. The defeat of Varus occurred, according to various
chronologists, in the year 763 of Rome (A.D. 9). The scene of the
defeat is conjectured to have been in the country of the Bructeri,
near the sources of the Ems and the Lippe. The news of this calamity,
the greatest that had befallen the Roman arms since the defeat of
Crassus, was received with universal amazement and terror. The
despairing cry of Augustus, "Varus, Varus, give me back my legions!"
testified to the consternation even at Rome, where it was expected
that the barbarians would take a terrible revenge for the wrongs they
had suffered.

The fears of invasion, however, were not realized. L. Asprena guarded
the banks of the Rhine, and the Germans were too little united among
themselves to attack the Empire. Augustus in the following year sent
Tiberius to the Rhine with a fresh army; but he does not seem to have
effected anything of importance. Hermann meantime quarrelled with
Segestes, chief of the Catti, whose daughter Tusnelda, he had carried
off and married against her father's consent. When Germanicus, after
the death of Augustus, marched into the interior of Germany to avenge
the defeat of Varus, he was assisted by Segestes, and also by the
Chauci and other tribes. In the first battle against Hermann, his wife
Tusnelda, was taken prisoner by the Romans, and she afterward figured
in the triumph of Germanicus. Germanicus, having reached the scene of
Varus's defeat, paid funeral honors to the remains of the legions; but
Hermann, who was hovering about his line of march, without coming to a
pitched battle, harassed him in his retreat, and occasioned a great
loss to Cæcina, the lieutenant of Germanicus.

In the following year, Germanicus advanced again as far as the
Visurgis, or Weser, where he found Hermann encamped ready for battle.
A desperate fight took place, in which Hermann, after performing
prodigies of valor, was defeated, and escaped with difficulty. But the
victory was gained at such cost that Germanicus and his army had to
take refuge in their ships, nor did the Romans ever again attempt the
conquest of the fiercer German tribes.

When Tiberius recalled Germanicus, he observed that the Cherusci,
Bructeri, and other unsubdued tribes, might be left to their own
internal dissensions. He seems to have guessed right.

No sooner had the Romans been driven off, than Hermann had to protect
his people against an internal danger. Maroboduus, the chief of the
Marcomanni, a man of great ambition, had by treachery or by open
fighting, made himself master of several neighboring tribes. Hermann
began to fear his designs, and after the defeat of Varus, warned him
of his peril by sending him the Roman general's head. When Germanicus
finally left the country, Hermann declared war against Maroboduus,
and, being joined by the Semnones and Longobards, defeated him on the
borders of the Hercynian forest, broke up his kingdom, and drove him
from Germany. The fugitive applied to Rome for assistance. Tiberius
then sent his son Drusus into the Illyricum; but the Romans did not
advance beyond the Danube, and Hermann remained unmolested in Northern
Germany. Shortly after, however, Hermann was killed by his own
relatives, being accused, as it would seem, of aspiring to absolute
dominion. He died at the age of thirty-seven, in the twenty-first year
of our era, after being for twelve years the leader and champion of
Germany.




TRAJAN

By J. S. REID, Litt.D.

(53-117)

[Illustration: Trajan.]


The Roman Empire reached its greatest extent under Marcus Ulpius
Traianus, the fourteenth emperor. Of him it was said that he "built
the world over," and the Romans themselves regarded him as the best,
and perhaps the greatest of their emperors. He was a native of
Italica, in Spain. The family to which he belonged was probably
Italian, and not Iberian, by blood. His father began life as a common
legionary soldier, and fought his way up to the consulship and the
governorship of Asia. He was one of the hardest fighters in Judæa
under Vespasian and Titus; he served, too, against the Parthians, and
won the highest military distinction open to a subject, the grant of
the triumphal insignia. Thus he acquired a prominent place among the
brand new patricians created by the Flavians as substitutes for the
nobles of old descent who had succumbed to the cruelty and rapacity of
the emperors from Tiberius to Nero.

The younger Trajan was rigorously trained by his father, and deeply
imbued with the same principles and tastes. He was a soldier born and
bred. No better representative of the true old hardy Roman type,
little softened either by luxury or education, had come to the head
of affairs since the days of Marius. The date of his birth was
probably 53 A.D. His training was almost exclusively military, but his
experience as an officer gave him an acquaintance with almost every
important province of the empire, which was of priceless value to him
when he came to the throne. For ten years he held a commission as
military tribune, which took him to many lands far asunder; then he
filled important posts in Syria and Spain. How much actual warfare
Trajan saw in those days we can hardly tell; he certainly went through
some severe service under his father's command against the Parthians.
By the year 89 he had achieved a considerable reputation. At that time
L. Antonius Saturninus headed a rebellion in Germany, which threatened
seriously to bring Domitian's rule to an end. Trajan was ordered in
hot haste from Farther Spain to the Rhine. Although he carried his
troops over that long and arduous march with almost unexampled
rapidity, he only arrived after the insurrection had been put down.
But his promptitude raised him higher in the favor of Domitian, and he
was advanced to the consulship in 91. Of the next five years of his
life we know nothing positively. It is not unlikely that they were
spent at Rome or in Italy in the fulfilment of some official duties.

When the revolution of 96 came, and Nerva replaced the murdered
Domitian, Trajan had conferred upon him one of the most important
posts in the Empire, that of consular legate of Upper Germany. An
officer whose nature, as the event showed, was interpenetrated with
the spirit of legality, was a fitting servant of a revolution whose
aim it was to substitute legality for personal caprice, as the
dominant principle of affairs. The short reign of Nerva really did
start the Empire on a new career, which lasted more than
three-quarters of a century. But it also demonstrated how impossible
it was for any one to govern at all who had no claim, either personal
or inherited, to the respect of the legions. Nerva saw that if he
could not find an Augustus to control the army, the army would find
another Domitian to trample the Senate under foot. In his difficulties
he took counsel with L. Licinius Sura, a lifelong friend of Trajan,
and in October, 97, he ascended the Capitol, and with all due
solemnity proclaimed that he adopted Trajan as his son.

The Senate confirmed the choice, and acknowledged the emperor's
adopted son as his successor. In a letter which Nerva sent at once to
Trajan, he quoted most significantly a line from the beginning of the
"Iliad," where Chryses, insulted by Achilles, prays to Apollo: "May
thy shafts afford me vengeance on the Greeks for my tears." After a
little hesitation Trajan accepted the position, which was marked by
the titles of Imperator, Cæsar, and Germanicus, and by the tribunician
authority. He immediately proceeded to Lower Germany, to assure
himself of the fidelity of the troops in that province, and while at
Cologne he received news of Nerva's death (January, 98).

The authority of the new emperor was recognized at once all the Empire
over. The novel fact that a master of the Romans should have been born
on Spanish soil seems to have passed with little remark, and this very
absence of notice is significant. Trajan's first care as emperor was
to write to the Senate an assurance like that which had been given by
Nerva, that he would neither kill nor degrade any senator. He ordered
the establishment of a temple and cult in honor of his adoptive
father, but he did not present himself at Rome for nearly two years
after his accession. Possibly he had taken measures before Nerva's
death to secure the revenge which Nerva craved, but probably did not
live to see. In his dealings with the mutinous prætorians the strength
of the new emperor's hand was shown at once. He ordered a portion of
the force to Germany. They did not venture to disobey, and were
distributed among the legions there. Those who remained at Rome were
easily overawed and reformed. It is still more surprising that the
soldiers should have quietly submitted to a reduction in the amount of
the donative or gift which it was customary for them to receive from a
new emperor, though the civil population of the capital were paid
their largess (_congiarium_) in full. By politic management Trajan was
able to represent the diminution as a sort of discount for immediate
payment, while the civilians had to wait a considerable time before
their full due was handed to them.

The secret of Trajan's power lay in his close personal relations with
the officers and men of the army, and in the soldierly qualities which
commanded their esteem. He possessed courage, justice, and frankness
to a high degree. Having a good title to military distinction himself,
he could afford, as the unwarlike emperors could not, to be generous
to his officers. The common soldiers, on the other hand, were
fascinated by his personal prowess and his somewhat ostentatious
_camaraderie_. His features were firm and clearly cut; his figure was
tall and soldierly, and exhibited the sinewy hard health of a veteran
campaigner. His hair was already gray before he came to the throne,
though he was not more than forty-four years old. The stoutness of the
emperor's arm had been proved in the face of his men in many a hard
fight. When on service he used the mean fare of the common private,
dining on salt pork, cheese, and sour wine. Nothing pleased him better
than to take part with the centurion, or the soldier in fencing or
other military exercise, and he would applaud any shrewd blow which
fell upon his own helmet. He loved to display his acquaintance with
the career of distinguished veterans, and to talk with them of their
battles and their wounds. Probably he lost nothing of his popularity
with the army by occasional free indulgence in sensual pleasures, with
which, as Bacon remarks, the soldier is apt to pay himself for the
perils he encounters. Yet every man felt and knew that no detail of
military duty, however minute, escaped the emperor's eye, and that any
relaxation of discipline would be rigidly punished, yet with
unwavering justice.

Trajan emphasized at once his personal control and the
constitutionality of his sway, by bearing on his campaigns the actual
title of "proconsul," which no other emperor had done. All things
considered, it is not surprising that he was able, without serious
opposition from the army, to remodel the whole military institutions
of the empire, and to bring them into a shape from which there was
comparatively little departure so long as the army lasted. In
disciplinary matters no emperor since Augustus had been able to keep
so strong a control over the troops. Pliny rightly praises Trajan as
the lawgiver and the founder of discipline, and Vegetius classes
Augustus, Trajan, and Hadrian together as restorers of the _morale_ of
the army. The confidence which existed between Trajan and his army
finds expression in some of the coins of his reign.

For nearly two years after his election Trajan did not appear in Rome.
He had decided already what the great task of his reign should be--the
establishment of security upon the dangerous north-eastern frontier.
Before visiting the capital he determined to put affairs in train for
the attainment of this great object. He made a thorough inspection of
the great lines of defence between the Danube and the Rhine, and
framed, and partly carried out, a vast scheme for strengthening and
securing them. The policy of opposing uncivilized tribes by the
construction of the _limes_, a raised embankment of earth or other
material, intersected here and there by fortifications, was not his
invention, but it owed in great measure its development to him. This
grand work, which would have excited the envy of Augustus, is
traceable in its main extent at the present day. Among a people of
roadmakers, Trajan was one of the greatest, and we have definite
evidence from inscriptions that some of the military roads in this
region were constructed by him. The more secure control which the
Romans now maintained over the territory within the _limes_, tended to
its rapid civilization, and the Roman influence, if not the Roman
arms, soon began to affect powerfully the regions beyond.

After his careful survey of the Rhine end of the great defensive
barrier, Trajan proceeded to consider it and plan it from the Danube.
From the age of Tiberius onward, the Romans possessed the whole
southern bank of the river from its source to the Euxine. But the
precarious tenure of their possession, had been deeply impressed on
them by the disasters and humiliations they had undergone in these
districts during the reign of Domitian. A prince had arisen among the
Dacians, Decebalus by name, worthy to be placed at the head of all the
great barbarian antagonists of Rome. Like Maroboduus, he was able to
combine the forces of tribes commonly hostile to each other, and his
military ability almost went the length of genius. After he had swept
the province of Moesia bare, he was defeated by one of Domitian's
lieutenants, but the position of affairs on the Danubio-Rhenish border
was still so threatening, that the emperor was glad to conclude a
treaty which conferred extraordinary advantages on his foe. Not only
did the Romans stipulate to pay to Decebalus an annual subsidy, which
he must have regarded as a tribute, but they agreed to supply him with
engineers and craftsmen skilled in all kinds of construction, but
particularly in the erection of fortifications and defensive works.
During the nine or ten years which had elapsed since the conclusion of
this remarkable treaty, the Dacian prince had immensely strengthened
the approaches to his kingdom from the Roman side. He had also
equipped and drilled his formidable army after the Roman fashion. It
was impossible for a soldier like Trajan to endure the conditions
laid down by Domitian; but the conquest of Dacia had become one of the
most formidable tasks that had ever confronted the Empire. Trajan, no
doubt, planned a war before he left the Danube for Rome late in 99.

The arrival of the emperor had been awaited in the capital with an
impatience which is expressed by Pliny and by Martial. All that had
happened since Trajan's elevation to the throne had raised high at
Rome the hope of a prosperous and glorious reign. As he entered the
city and went on foot to the Capitol, the plaudits of the people were
unmistakably genuine. During his stay in the city he riveted more
firmly still the affections both of the Senate and of the people. The
reconciliation of the Empire with liberty, inaugurated, as Tacitus
says, by Nerva, seemed now to be securely achieved. Trajan was
absolutely open and simple, and lived with men at Rome as he had lived
with his soldiers while on service. He realized the Senate's ideal of
the citizen ruler. The assurance that no senator should suffer was
renewed by oath. All the old republican formalities were most
punctiliously observed--even those attendant on the emperor's election
to the consulate, so far as they did not involve a restoration of the
old order of voting at the comitia. The veneration for republican
tradition is curiously attested by the reproduction of many republican
types of coin struck by senatorial officers.

Trajan seized every opportunity for emphasizing his view that the
_princeps_ was merely the greatest of the magistrates, and so was not
above but under the laws. He was determined, he said, to be to his
subjects such a ruler as he had desired for himself when a subject.
There is a pretty story to the effect that he handed the commander of
the prætorians his sword, and said, "Use it for me if I do well, but
against me if I do ill." Martial, who had called Domitian his lord and
his god, now cried, "In him we have no lord, but an imperator!" Real
power and influence were accorded to the Senate, which had now, by the
incorporation of members whose origin was provincial, become in a
manner representative of the whole empire. Trajan associated with the
senators on equal terms, and enjoyed in their company every kind of
recreation. All pomp was distasteful to him, and discarded by him.
There was practically no court, and no intrigues of any kind were
possible. The approach to his house was free, and he loved to pass
through the city unattended, and to pay unexpected visits to his
friends. He thirsted for no senator's blood, and used severity against
the _delatores_ alone. There was but one insignificant conspiracy
against him during his whole reign.

Though not literary himself, Trajan conciliated the literary men, who
at all times had close relations with the Senate. His intimate, M.
Licinius, played an excellent Mæcenas to his Augustus. In his efforts
to win the affections of Roman society, Trajan was excellently aided
by his wife Plotina, who was as simple as her husband, benevolent,
pure in character, and entirely unambitious. The hold which Trajan
acquired over the people was no less firm than that which he
maintained upon the army and the Senate. His largesses, his
distributions of food, his public works, and his spectacles were all
on a generous scale. The exhibitions in the arena were perhaps at
their zenith during his tenure of power. Though, for some unexplained
reason, he abolished the mimes, so beloved of the populace, at the
outset of his reign, he availed himself of the occasion of his first
triumph to restore them again. The people were delighted by the
removal of the imperial _exedra_ in the circus, whereby five thousand
additional places were provided. Taxation was in many directions
reduced, and the financial exactions of the imperial officers
controlled by the erection of a special court. Elaborate precautions
were taken to save Italy from famine; it is said that corn for seven
years' consumption at the capital was retained in the granaries.
Special encouragement was given to merchants to import articles of
food. The corporation of bakers was organized, and made more effective
for the service of the public. The internal trade of Italy was
powerfully stimulated by the careful maintenance and extension of the
different lines of road.

But the most striking evidence of Trajan's solicitude for his people's
welfare is found in his institution of the _alimenta_, whereby means
were provided for the rearing of poor and orphan children in Italy.
The method had been sketched out by Nerva, but its great development
was due to Trajan. The moneys allotted by the emperor were in many
cases supplemented by private benevolence. As a soldier, Trajan
realized the need of men for the maintenance of the Empire against the
outer barbarians, and he preferred that these men should be of Italian
birth. He was only carrying a step further the policy of Augustus, who
by a system of rewards and penalties had tried to encourage marriage
and the nurture of children. The annual effect of Trajan's regulations
is hard to measure; they were probably more effectual for their object
than those of Augustus. The foundations were confiscated by Pertinax,
after they had existed less than a century.

Toward the end of 100, or early in 101, Trajan left Rome for the
Danube. Pretexts for a Dacian war were not difficult to find. Although
there was no lack of hard fighting, victory in this war depended
largely on the work of the engineer. The great military road
connecting the posts in Upper Germany with those on the Danube, which
had been begun by Tiberius, was now extended along the right bank of
the river as far as the modern Orsova. The year 101 was spent mainly
in roadmaking and fortification. In the following campaign, after
desperate fighting to the north of the Danube in the mountainous
region of Transylvania, such as Cæsar never encountered in all his
Gaulish wars, the capital of Decebalus was taken, and he was forced to
terms. He agreed to raze all fortresses, to surrender all weapons,
prisoners, and Roman deserters, and to become a dependent prince under
the suzerainty of Rome. Trajan came back to Italy with Dacian envoys,
who in ancient style begged the Senate to confirm the conditions
granted by the commander in the field. The emperor now enjoyed his
first Dacian triumph, and assumed the title of Dacicus. At the same
time he royally entertained the people, and no less royally rewarded
his brave officers.

But the Dacian chief could not school his high spirit to endure the
conditions of the treaty, and Trajan soon found it necessary to
prepare for another war. A massive stone bridge was built across the
Danube, near the modern Turn Severin, by Apollodorus, the gifted
architect who afterward designed the forum of Trajan. In 105 began the
new struggle, which on the side of Decebalus could now only lead to
victory or to destruction. The Dacians fought their ground inch by
inch, and their army as a whole may be said to have bled to death. The
prince put an end to his own life. His kingdom became an imperial
province; in it many colonies were founded, and peopled by settlers
drawn from different parts of the empire. The work done by Trajan in
the Danubian regions left a lasting mark upon their history. The
emperor returned to the capital in 106, laden with captured treasure.
His triumph outdid in splendor all those that went before it. Games
are said to have been held continuously for four months. The chariot
races were the grandest ever seen. Ten thousand gladiators contended
in the arena, and eleven thousand beasts were killed in the contests.
Congratulatory embassies came from all lands, even from India. The
grand and enduring monument of the Dacian wars is the noble pillar
which still stands on the site of Trajan's forum at Rome. The end of
the Dacian wars was followed by seven years of peace.

Many details in the administration of the law, and particularly of the
criminal law, were improved. To cure corruption in the Senate the
ballot was introduced at elections to magistracies. The finances of
the state were economically managed, and taxpayers were most carefully
guarded from oppression. Trajan never lacked money to expend on great
works of public utility; as a builder, he may fairly be compared with
Augustus. His forum and its numerous appendages were constructed on a
magnificent scale. Many regions of Italy and the provinces, besides
the city itself, benefited by the care and munificence which the
emperor bestowed on such public improvements. His attitude toward
religion was, like that of Augustus, moderate and conservative. The
famous letter to Pliny about the Christians is, according to Roman
ideas, merciful and considerate. It was impossible, however, for a
Roman magistrate of the time to rid himself of the idea that all forms
of religion must do homage to the civil power. Hence the conflict
which made Trajan appear in the eyes of Christians like Tertullian,
the most infamous of monsters. On the whole, Trajan's civil
administration was sound, careful, and sensible, rather than brilliant
or epoch-making.

[Illustration: Rome under Trajan--A chariot race.]

In 113 or 114 Trajan left Italy to make war in the East. The
never-ending Parthian problem confronted him, and with it were more or
less connected a number of minor difficulties. Already by 106 the
position of Rome in the East had been materially improved by the
peaceful annexation of districts bordering on the province of Syria.
The district of Damascus, hitherto a dependency, and the last
remaining fragment of the Jewish kingdom, were incorporated with
Syria; Bostra and Petra were permanently occupied, and a great portion
of the Nabathæan kingdom was constituted the Roman province of Arabia.
Rome thus obtained mastery of the most important positions lying on
the great trade-routes from East to West. These changes could not but
affect the relations of the Roman with the Parthian empire, and the
affairs of Armenia became, in 114, the occasion of war. Trajan's
campaigns in the East ended in complete though brilliant failure.
In the retreat from Ctesiphon (117), the old emperor tasted for almost
the first time the bitterness of defeat in the field. He attacked the
desert city of Hatra, westward of the Tigris, whose importance is
still attested by grand ruins. The want of water made it impossible to
maintain a large force near the city, and the brave Arabs routed the
Roman cavalry. Trajan, who narrowly escaped being killed, was forced
to withdraw.

A more alarming difficulty lay before him. Taking advantage of the
absence of the emperor in the far East, and possibly by an
understanding with the leaders of the rising in Armenia and the
annexed portions of Parthia, the Jews all over the East had taken up
arms at the same moment, and at a given signal. The massacres they
committed were portentous. In Cyprus 240,000 men are said to have been
put to death, and at Cyrene 220,000. At Alexandria, on the other hand,
many Jews were killed. The Romans punished massacre by massacre, and
the complete suppression of the insurrection was long delayed, but the
Jews made no great stand against disciplined troops. Trajan still
thought of returning to Mesopotamia, and of avenging his defeat at
Hatra, but he was stricken with sickness and compelled to take ship
for Italy. His illness increasing, he landed in Cilicia, and died at
Selinus in that country about the end of July, 117.

Trajan, who had no children, had continually delayed to settle the
succession to the throne, though Pliny, in the "Panegyric" had
pointedly drawn his attention to the matter, and it must have caused
the Senate much anxiety. Whether Hadrian, the cousin of Trajan, was
actually adopted by him or not, is impossible to determine; certainly
Hadrian had not been advanced to any great honors by Trajan. Even his
military service had not been distinguished. Plotina asserted the
adoption, and it was readily and most fortunately accepted, if not
believed, as a fact.

The Senate had decreed to Trajan as many triumphs as he chose to
celebrate. For the first time a dead general triumphed. When Trajan
was deified, he appropriately retained, alone among the emperors, a
title he had won for himself in the field, that of "Parthicus." He was
a patient organizer of victory rather than a strategic genius. He
laboriously perfected the military machine, which when once set in
motion went on to victory. Much of the work he did was great and
enduring, but the last year of his life forbade the Romans to
attribute to him that _felicitas_ which they regarded as an inborn
quality of the highest generals. Each succeeding emperor was saluted
with the wish that he might be "better than Trajan and more fortunate
than Augustus." Yet the breach made in Trajan's _felicitas_ by the
failure in the East was no greater than that made in the _felicitas_
of Augustus by his retirement from the right bank of the Rhine.




DIOCLETIAN

(245-313)

[Illustration: Circus scene. [TN]]


Caius Valerius Diocletianus, one of the most famous of the Roman
emperors, was, as De Quincey says, "doubtless that man of iron whom
the times demanded." He was born at Dioclea, in Dalmatia, some say at
Salona, about A.D. 245 according to some, but others make him ten
years older. His original name was Diocles, which he afterward changed
into Diocletianus. He is said by some to have been the son of a
notary, by others the freedman of a senator named Anulinus. He entered
the army at an early age, and rose gradually to rank; he served in
Gaul, in Moesia, under Probus, and was present at the campaign against
the Persians, in which Carus, then emperor, perished in a mysterious
manner. Diocletian commanded the household or imperial body-guards
when young Numerianus, the son of Carus, was secretly put to death by
Aper his father-in-law, while travelling in a close litter on account
of illness, on the return of the army from Persia. The death of
Numerianus being discovered after several days by the soldiers near
Calchedon, they arrested Aper and proclaimed Diocletian emperor, who
addressing the soldiers from his tribunal in the camp, protested his
innocence of the death of Numerianus, and then upbraiding Aper for the
crime, plunged his sword into the traitor's body.

The new emperor observed to a friend that "he had now killed the
boar," punning on the word Aper, which means a boar, and alluding to
the prediction of a soothsayer in Gaul, who had told him that he would
become emperor after having killed a boar (Vopiscus, in "Hist. Aug.").
Diocletian, self-composed and strong-minded in other respects, was all
his life an anxious believer in divination, which superstition led him
probably to inflict summary punishment upon Aper with his own hands.
He made his solemn entrance into Nicomedia in September, 284, which
town he afterward chose for his favorite residence.

Carinus, the other son of Carus, who had remained in Italy, having
collected a force to attack Diocletian, the two armies met at Margum,
in Moesia, where the soldiers of Carinus had the advantage at first,
but Carinus himself being killed during the battle by his officers,
who detested him for his cruelty and debauchery, both armies joined
in acknowledging Diocletian emperor in 285. Diocletian was generous
after his victory, and, contrary to the common practice, there were no
executions, proscriptions, or confiscations of property; he even
retained most of the officers of Carinus in their places.

Diocletian, on assuming the imperial power, found the Empire assailed
by enemies in various quarters--on the Persian frontiers, on the side
of Germany and of Illyricum, and in Britain; besides which a serious
revolt had broken out in Gaul among the rural population, under two
leaders who had assumed the title of emperor. To quell the disturbance
in Gaul, Diocletian sent his old friend Maximianus, a native of
Pannonia, and a brave but rude uncultivated soldier. Maximianus
defeated the Bagaudi, for such was the name the rustic insurgents had
assumed. In the year 286, Diocletian chose Maximianus as his colleague
in the Empire, under the name of Marcus Valerius Maximianus Augustus,
and it is to the credit of both that the latter continued ever after
faithful to Diocletian and willing to follow his advice. Maximianus
was stationed in Gaul and on the German frontier to repel invasion;
Diocletian resided chiefly in the East to watch the Persians, though
he appears to have visited Rome in the early part of his reign. About
287 the revolt of Carausius took place. In the following year
Maximianus defeated the Germans near Treviri, and Diocletian himself
marched against other tribes on the Rhætian frontier; the year after
he defeated the Sarmatians on the lower Danube. In the same year, 289,
peace was made between Carausius and the two emperors, Carausius being
allowed to retain possession of Britain. In 290 Maximianus and
Diocletian met at Milan to confer together on the state of the Empire,
after which Diocletian returned to Nicomedia. The Persians soon after
again invaded Mesopotamia and threatened Syria; the Quinquegentiani, a
federation of tribes in the Mauritania Cæsariensis, revolted; another
revolt under one Achillæus broke out in Egypt; another in Italy under
a certain Julianus.

Diocletian thought it necessary to increase the number of his
colleagues in order to face the attacks in the various quarters. On
the 1st of March, 292, or 291, according to some chronologists, he
appointed Galerius as Cæsar, and presented him to the troops at
Nicomedia. At the same time Maximianus adopted on his part Constantius
called Chlorus. The two Cæsars repudiated their respective wives;
Galerius married Valeria, Diocletian's daughter, adding to his name
that of Valerianus; and Constantius married Theodora, daughter of
Maximianus. Galerius was a native of Dacia, and a good soldier, but
violent and cruel; he had been a herdsman in his youth, for which he
has been styled, in derision, Armentarius. The two Cæsars remained
subordinate to the two Augusti, though each of the four was entrusted
with the administration of a part of the Empire. Diocletian kept to
himself Asia and Egypt; Maximianus had Italy and Africa; Galerius,
Thrace and Illyricum; and Constantius had Gaul and Spain. But it was
rather an administrative than a political division. At the head of the
edicts of each prince were put the names of all the four, beginning
with that of Diocletian.

Diocletian resorted to this arrangement probably as much for reasons
of internal as of external policy. For nearly a hundred years before,
ever since the death of Commodus, the soldiers had been in the habit
of giving or selling the imperial crown, to which any general might
aspire. Between thirty and forty emperors had been thus successively
made and unmade many of whom only reigned a few months. By fixing upon
four colleagues, one in each of the great divisions of the Empire,
each having his army, and all mutually checking one another,
Diocletian put a stop to military insolence and anarchy. The Empire
was no longer put up to sale, the immediate and intolerable evil was
effectually cured, though another danger remained, that of disputes
and wars between the various sharers of the imperial power; still it
was a smaller danger and one which did not manifest itself so long as
Diocletian remained at the helm. Writers have been very free of their
censure upon this emperor for parcelling, as they call it, the Empire;
but this was the only chance there was of preventing its crumbling to
pieces. Italy, and Rome in particular, lost by the change: they no
longer monopolized the wealth and power of the world, but the other
provinces gained. The Empire was much too large for one single man or
a single central administration, under the dwindled influence of the
Roman name, and amidst the numerous causes of local dissension and
discontent, private ambition, social corruption, and foreign
hostility, that had accumulated for three centuries, since the time of
Augustus.

[Illustration: Army on horse. [TN]]

The new Cæsars justified Diocletian's expectations. Constantius
defeated the Franks and the Alemanni, and soon after reconquered
Britain. Galerius subjugated the Carpi, and transported the whole
tribe into Pannonia. In the year 296, the Persians, under their king
Narses, again invaded Mesopotamia and part of Syria. Galerius marched
against them, but being too confident was defeated by superior
numbers, and obliged to retire. On his meeting Diocletian, the emperor
showed his dissatisfaction by letting Galerius walk for a mile, clad
in purple as he was, by the side of his car. The following year
Galerius again attacked the Persians, and completely defeated them,
taking an immense booty. The wives and children of Narses, who were
among the prisoners, were treated by Galerius with humanity and
respect. Narses sued for peace, which was granted by Diocletian on
condition of the Persians giving up all the territory on the right or
western bank of the Tigris. This peace was concluded in 297, and
lasted forty years.

At the same time Diocletian marched into Egypt against Achillæus, whom
he besieged in Alexandria, which he took after a siege of eight
months, when the usurper and his chief adherents were put to death.
Diocletian is said to have behaved on this occasion with unusual
sternness. Several towns of Egypt, among others Busiris and Coptos,
were destroyed. Constantine, the son of Constantius, who was educated
at Nicomedia, accompanied the emperor in this expedition. Diocletian
fixed the limits of the Empire on that side at the island of
Elephantina, where he built a castle, and made peace with the
neighboring tribes, called by some Nubæ and by others Nabatæ, to whom
he gave up the strip of territory which the Romans had conquered, of
seven days' march above the first cataract, on condition that they
should prevent the Blemmyes and Ethiopians from attacking Egypt.
Maximianus in the meantime was engaged in putting down the revolt in
Mauritania, which he effected with full success.

For several years after this the empire enjoyed peace, and Diocletian
and his colleagues were chiefly employed in framing laws and
administrative regulations, and in constructing forts on the
frontiers. Diocletian kept a splendid court at Nicomedia, which town
he embellished with numerous structures. He, or rather Maximianus by
his order, caused the magnificent Thermæ at Rome to be built, the
remains of which still bear Diocletian's name, and which contained,
besides the baths, a library, a museum, public walks, and other
establishments.

In February, 303, Diocletian issued an edict against the Christians,
ordering their churches to be pulled down, their sacred books to be
burnt, and all Christians to be dismissed from offices civil or
military, with other penalties, exclusive however of death. Various
causes have been assigned for this measure. It is known that Galerius
had always been hostile to the Christians, while Diocletian had openly
favored them, had employed them in his armies and about his person;
and Eusebius speaks of the prosperity, security, and protection which
the Christians enjoyed under his reign. They had churches in most
towns, and one at Nicomedia in particular under the eye of the
emperor. Just before the edict was issued, Galerius had repaired to
Nicomedia to induce Diocletian to proscribe the Christians. He filled
the emperor's mind with reports of conspiracies and seditions. The
imperial palace took fire, Constantine ("Oratio ad Coetum Sanctorum")
says, from lightning, and Galerius suggested to the emperor that it
was a Christian plot.

The heathen priests on their part exerted themselves for the same
purpose. It happened that on the occasion of a solemn sacrifice in
presence of the emperor, while priests were consulting the entrails of
the victims, the Christian officers in the imperial retinue crossed
themselves; upon which the priests declared that the presence of
profane men prevented them from discovering the auspices. Diocletian,
who was very anxious to pry into futurity, became irritated, and
ordered all his Christian officers to sacrifice to the gods under pain
of flagellation and dismissal, which many of them underwent. Several
oracles which he consulted gave answers unfavorable to the Christians.
The church of Nicomedia was the first pulled down by order of the
emperor. The rashness of a Christian who publicly tore down the
imperial edict exasperated Diocletian still more: the culprit was put
to a cruel death. Then came a second edict, ordering all magistrates
to arrest the Christian bishops and presbyters, and compel them to
sacrifice to the gods. This was giving to their enemies power over
their lives, and it proved, in fact, the beginning of a cruel
persecution, whose ravages were the more extensive in proportion to
the great diffusion of Christianity during a long period of
toleration. This was the last persecution under the Roman Empire, and
it has been called by the name of Diocletian. But that emperor issued
the two edicts reluctantly and after long hesitation, according to
Lactantius's acknowledgment: he fell ill a few months after, and on
recovering from his long illness he abdicated. Galerius, who had
instigated the persecution, was the most zealous minister of it; the
persecution raged with most fury in the provinces subject to his rule,
and he continued it for several years after Diocletian's abdication,
so that it might with more propriety be called the Galerian
persecution. Legend says that he died of a horrible disease, filled
with remorse and imagining himself haunted by the martyred spirits.
The countries under the government of Constantius suffered the least
from it.

In November of that year (303) Diocletian repaired to Rome, where he
and Maximianus enjoyed the honor of a triumph, followed by festive
games. This was the last triumph that Rome saw. The populace of that
city complained of the economy of Diocletian on the occasion, who
replied that moderation and temperance were most required when the
censor was present. They vented their displeasure in jibes and
sarcasms, which so hurt Diocletian that he left Rome abruptly in the
month of December for Ravenna, in very cold weather. In this journey
he was seized by an illness which affected him the whole of the
following year, which he spent at Nicomedia. At one time he was
reported to be dead. He rallied, however, in the spring of 305, and
showed himself in public, but greatly altered in appearance. Galerius
soon after came to Nicomedia, and it is said that he persuaded
Diocletian to abdicate. Others say that Diocletian did it
spontaneously.

On the 1st of May he repaired with his guards to a spot three miles
out of Nicomedia, where he had thirteen years before proclaimed
Galerius as Cæsar, and there addressing his officers and court, he
said that the infirmities of age warned him to retire from power, and
to deliver the administration of the state into stronger hands. He
then proclaimed Galerius as Augustus, and Maximinus Daza as the new
Cæsar. Constantine, who has given an account of the ceremony, which is
quoted by Eusebius in his life of that prince, was present, and the
troops fully expected that he would be the new Cæsar; when they heard
another mentioned, they asked each other whether Constantine had
changed his name. But Galerius did not leave them long in suspense; he
pushed forward Maximinus and showed him to the assembly, and
Diocletian clothed him with the purple vest, after which the old
emperor returned privately in his carriage to Nicomedia, and
immediately after set off for Salona in Dalmatia, near which he built
himself an extensive palace by the sea-shore, in which he lived for
the rest of his life, respected by the other emperors, without cares
and without regret.

[Illustration: The Victims of Galerius.]

Part of the external walls which inclosed the area belonging to his
palace and other buildings still remain, with three of the gates,
as well as a temple, which is now a church at Spalatro, or Spalato, in
Dalmatia, a comparatively modern town, grown out of the decay of the
ancient Salona, and built in great part within the walls of
Diocletian's residence, from the name of which, "Palatium," it is
believed that "Spalato" is derived.

At the same time that Diocletian abdicated at Nicomedia, Maximianus,
according to an agreement between them, performed a similar ceremony
at Milan, proclaiming Constantius as Augustus, and Severus as Cæsar.
Both Severus and Maximinus Daza were inferior persons, and creatures
of Galerius, who insisted upon their nomination in preference to that
of Maxentius and Constantine, whom Diocletian had at first proposed.
Maximianus retired to his seat in Lucania, but not being endowed with
the firmness of Diocletian he tried some time after to recover his
former power, and wrote to his old colleague to induce him to do the
same. "Were you but to come to Salona," answered Diocletian, "and see
the vegetables which I grow in my garden with my own hands, you would
no longer talk to me of empire." In his retirement he used to observe
to his associates how difficult it is, even for the best-intentioned
man, to govern well, as he cannot see everything with his own eyes,
but must trust to others, who often deceive him.

Once only he left his retirement to meet Galerius in Pannonia for the
purpose of appointing a new Cæsar, Licinius, in the place of Severus,
who had died. Licinius, however, did not prove grateful, for after the
death of Galerius, in 311, he ill-treated his widow, Valeria,
Diocletian's daughter, who then, with her mother, Prisca, took refuge
in the territories of Maximinus Daza. The latter offered to marry
Valeria, but on her refusal exiled both her and her mother into the
deserts of Syria, and put to death several of their attendants.
Diocletian remonstrated in favor of his wife and daughter, but to no
purpose, and his grief on this occasion probably hastened his death,
which took place at his residence near Salona in July, 313. In the
following year his wife and daughter were put to death by order of
Licinius.

Diocletian ranks among the most distinguished emperors of Rome; his
reign of twenty-one years was upon the whole prosperous for the
empire, and creditable to the Roman name. He was severe, but not
wantonly cruel, and we ought to remember that mercy was not a Roman
virtue. His conduct after his abdication shows that his was no common
mind. The chief charge against him is his haughtiness in introducing
the Oriental ceremonial of prostration into the Roman court. The
Christian writers, and especially Lactantius, have spoken unfavorably
of him; but Lactantius cannot be implicitly trusted. Of the regular
historians of his reign we have only the meagre narratives of
Eutropius and Aurelius Victor, the others being now lost; but notices
of Diocletian's life are scattered about in various authors, Libanius,
Vopiscus, Eusebius, Julian in his "Cæsars," and the contemporary
panegyrists, Eumenes and Mamertinus. His laws or edicts are in the
"Code." Among other useful reforms, he abolished the _frumentarii_, or
licensed informers, who were stationed in every province to report
any attempt at mutiny or rebellion, and who basely enriched themselves
by working on the fears of the inhabitants. He also reformed and
reduced the number of the insolent Prætorians, who were afterward
totally disbanded by Constantine.




ALARIC THE BOLD

By ARCHDEACON FARRAR, D.D., F.R.S.

(360-410)

[Illustration: Men on a river raft. [TN]]


Alaric, the "All-ruler," surnamed the Baltha, or Bold, was born, about
360, on an island in the delta of the Danube. As long as the great
Theodosius lived, the Goths continued in his pay; but when he died in
395, and Alaric was elevated on the shield as king of the Visigoths,
he determined to lead his nation to independent victory. In 395 and
396 he invaded Greece,[7] and Stilicho, the Vandal general of the
Western Emperor, advanced against him. The strategy of Stilicho was
masterly, and it would probably have gone hard with Alaric had not
Stilicho been suddenly bidden by the Eastern Emperor, Arcadius, to
withdraw his western troops. Again, in 396, Stilicho penned Alaric in
the Peloponnesus, but for some unknown reason allowed him to escape
into Illyricum. The Gothic chief had, however, struck deadly terror
into the Eastern Empire; and by way of pacifying him Arcadius made him
Master-General of Illyricum.

         [Footnote 7: In this first invasion he overran all Greece,
         and took Athens with little resistance. He spared her art
         treasures, and acted with great moderation and humanity. Our
         illustration "Alaric in Athens" represents him seated among
         the inhabitants, who welcomed him as a conqueror, with every
         demonstration of reverence.]

Alaric had already found the way to Italy when he accompanied
Theodosius in his campaign against the usurper Maximus in 394. In 400
he descended into Italy, not with an army only, but with the migration
of his entire people. He defeated the Romans under the walls of
Aquileia, and in 401 besieged Honorius in Milan. In 402 a vast army
under Stilicho met him at Pollentia; and when an old chieftain advised
him to retire, Alaric, with fierce indignation, silenced his timid
counsellor, and told him that he had been assured by a voice which
came from the grave and said to him, "_Thou shalt penetrate to the
City_" (_ad Urbem_). But the oracle on this occasion had "paltered"
with him in a double sense. He penetrated indeed _ad Urbem_, not
however "to the _City_" but to the little river _Urbis_ (or Borbo),
near Pollenzo. On Good Friday, April 4, 402, the Western army, under a
dwarfish Hun chieftain named Saulus, attacked and routed Alaric,
recovering the splendid spoils of Greece, freeing his captives, and
winning back the purple robes which the Emperor Valens had lost in the
battle of Adrianople. In that disastrous defeat even the wife of
Alaric, if we may believe the poet Claudian, was taken prisoner.

[Illustration: Alaric in Athens.]

Alaric retreated through Lombardy, and the feeble Emperor Honorius--"a
crowned nothingness"--celebrated at Rome, in 404, that triumph which
was signalized by the last display of the brutal gladiatorial games.
No sooner had the first blood been shed than the Eastern monk
Telemachus sprang down into the arena to part the combatants. His life
paid the price of his glorious temerity. He was hewn and stoned to
death. But that death was not in vain. The horrid massacres, at which
not only men but women gazed in demoniac pleasure and excitement, had
been condemned centuries before by the genius of Christianity. It was
monstrous that an emperor calling himself a Christian should preside
at such a spectacle. But the martyrdom of Telemachus at last touched
the callous and torpid consciences of nominal Christians. Thenceforth
the games of the amphitheatre were abolished. But it was too late for
repentance. Alike "the incomparable wickedness and the incomparable
splendor" of the Imperial City were doomed to destruction. Even the
blood of a Christian martyr voluntarily shed would not atone for the
blood of hundreds of brave barbarians who, in that huge Flavian
amphitheatre, had been

  "Butchered to make a Roman holiday."

The day was near at hand when the Goths would arise and glut their
ire.

Alaric, though he had retreated, was still in a position to dictate
terms to Stilicho. He fixed his camp at Æmona, and was promised large
pay and the government of a Western province under nominal allegiance
to the Western Emperor. But the pledges made to him were broken, and
their fulfilment delayed. In 408 the promise of the oracle was
fulfilled, for he led his troops under the walls of Rome. The feeble
and timid Honorius had retired to Ravenna, where he was safe behind
the marshes, the pine-woods, and the stone walls against which Alaric
said that he did not fight. In 408 the wretched court filled to the
full the brimming cup of its iniquities--first by a massacre of
barbarian auxiliaries at Pavia, and then by the foul, ungrateful
murder of Stilicho himself, at the command of Honorius. No army barred
the path of Alaric, but an Italian hermit denounced on him the wrath
of heaven. This might have awoke the superstitious terrors of the
Gothic soldiers if Alaric had not assured them, with confidence, that
he was obeying a divine and irresistible command. The Goths encamped
under the walls which for six hundred and nineteen years had never
been threatened by a foreign enemy. The wealthy, effeminate, corrupted
nobles, and people of the Eternal City thought to terrify Alaric back
by boasts of their numbers. His scornful answer simply was, "The
thicker the hay, the easier it is mowed." He demanded all their gold,
silver, movables, and barbarian slaves. "What then, O King, will you
leave us?" He grimly said, "Your lives."

He was content, however, this time to accept a ransom, of which the
most curious element was three thousand pounds of pepper.

The folly, pride, and braggadocio of Honorius, or rather of his
miserable court, brought Alaric a second time to Rome in 409. The city
capitulated, and he raised Attalus to the purple as a rival to
Honorius. But Attalus proved utterly incompetent, and the next year
Alaric publicly and insultingly degraded him to a private position. In
410 a fresh insult and wrong inflicted on the Goths by Honorius
brought Alaric once more to Rome. He burst in by the Salarian gate,
and sacked the city, which was only saved from irretrievable
destruction by the respect of the Goths for the churches, which they
regarded as inviolable asylums. The pillage and conflagration of Rome,
and the resultant ruin and misery, came on the world like a shock of
earthquake; but the Pagans saw that the catastrophe would have been
yet more awful if the conquerors had not been Christians as well as
the conquered.

It seemed as if even the Imperial City could not fall without some
circumstance of irony and insult. Paganism may be said to have
perished in two bursts of laughter: one when in Alexandria the
Christian mob burst into merriment to see the rats scurry out of the
rotten head of the shattered statue of Serapis; and again when
Theodosius and his soldiers laughed at the golden thunderbolts torn
from the uplifted arms of the menacing statue of Jupiter. And Honorius
managed to invest even the fall of Rome with ludicrous associations.
He was a great fancier of fowls, and had a particularly large hen,
which, out of compliment, he called _Roma_. When the agitated eunuch
entered to tell him that "Rome had perished," "What!" cried the
Emperor, in a voice of deep concern, "why, she was feeding out of my
hand only an hour ago!" "It is the _city_ of Rome that has fallen,
sire!" "Oh, my friend," said the Emperor, with a sigh of relief, "but
I thought you meant that my _hen_ 'Roma' had died."

Laden with spoils of priceless value, the creaking wagons of the Gauls
went southward. Alaric meant to lead them to the conquest first of
Sicily, then of Africa. But death overtook him amid the schemes of his
ambition. He died after a short illness, and was buried in the bed of
the river which washes the walls of Cosentia. The captives who reared
the tomb were massacred, that none might know where the hero lay. The
Visigothic kingdom of Spain, founded by the warrior tribe which he
first led into the West, is one of the most permanent results of his
invasion.

[Illustration: The Last Gladiatorial Contest.]




ATTILA

By ARCHDEACON FARRAR, D.D., F.R.S.

(REIGNED 434-453)

[Illustration: Attila.]


The Goths were "improvable barbarians;" but the Huns whom Attila led
to ravage the fair peninsula were mere Tartar savages of the lowest
stamp.

All the other invaders of Italy were of Teutonic origin, but the Huns
were Mongols--of such perfect hideousness that Jornandes regarded them
as the offspring of witches and demons. Attila, son of Mundzuk, "the
scourge of God," resembled his soldiers in his flat, swarthy features,
deep-set, fierce, rolling black eyes, and stunted figure. The Huns
were uncivilizable savages, who might harry a continent, but neither
under Attila, nor Genghis, nor Timour, could ever found an organized
kingdom. This terrific and brutal little Kalmuck, with his bead-like
eyes, this skin-clad devourer of raw flesh, delighted to lay waste
whole empires with fire and sword, and to terrify the world. In 434 he
became king of the Huns with his brother Bleda. In 445 Bleda died,
possibly by murder; and in 445 Attila, now sole king of the Huns,
invaded the Eastern Empire, and ravaged it even to the gates of
Constantinople. He was only bought off from destroying it by an
enormous tribute. The infamous plot to assassinate him by the
treachery of Edecon, who was one of his counsellors, was discovered
and foiled, and Attila sent message after message filled with insults
to Theodosius II. In 451 his vast army moved westward, and devastated
Gaul. It was met in the Mauriac plain and defeated by Ætius in the
tremendous battle of Chalons, after a carnage among the most frightful
that the world has ever seen. The Huns were only saved from final
destruction by the heroic boldness of Attila. He had a vast hill of
saddles and other spoils erected, and declared his determination to
burn himself alive rather than be taken captive. He led back his
shattered host to Pannonia, and there in his wooden palace meditated
revenge. In the one authentic glimpse which we get of his mode of
life, we see him at a banquet, while his nobles and warriors caroused
and burst into peals of laughter at the buffooneries of an idiot and a
jester. But the Hunnish king sat grave and silent, caressing the
cheeks of the boy Ernak, his favorite son, whom the augur pointed out
as the heir of his destinies.

In 452 he once more put his myriads in motion and invaded Italy. Every
where the land was as the garden of Eden before him; behind him it
was a desolate wilderness. Encouraged by the omen of some storks
leaving their nest, he stormed and destroyed Aquileia, and, razing
city after city into heaps of blackened ruins, advanced to Milan,
boasting that "where his horses' hoofs trod the grass never grew."
Rome awaited with trembling a fate which seemed to threaten
unprecedented catastrophe. But in this awful crisis the Pope, Leo I.,
showed himself the true _Defensor civitatis_. He headed a splendid
embassy to the camp of Attila. Already Leo had helped to trace with
firm hand the deep lines of Christian orthodoxy which were accepted by
the Church at the fourth great OEcumenical Council of Chalcedon in 451
as her final utterance as to the true Godhead, the perfect Manhood,
the invisible yet distinct union of both Godhead and Manhood, in the
person of her Lord. Now Leo showed what miracle could be achieved by
the irresistible might of weakness. Attila's god was a naked iron
sword of gigantic size, which had been accidentally found by a
herdsman and presented to him, but which he palmed off on his nation
as the authentic sword of the Scythian war-god. Yet he was easily
overawed by the majesty of religion. He scorned the guilty, corrupt
courtiers of Constantinople, but he almost trembled before a holy man.
Already in 451 he had spared the defenceless city of Troyes at the
entreaty of its bishop, St. Lupus, and had asked the benefit of his
prayers. And when he gazed on the calm countenance, noble presence,
and dauntless demeanor of Pope Leo, an awful dread fell upon him.
Alaric had conquered Rome, but Alaric had died immediately afterward.
How if it would be so with Attila? He yielded, he retired; he said--or
perhaps he said--that he could conquer _men_, but that the wolf
(Lupus) and the lion (Leo) had learnt how to conquer him. The tide of
brutal and barbarous invasion was rolled back again, and the world and
the city saw that while the Emperor Valentinian had been ready to fly,
the Pope Leo was not afraid to advance, and that "when the successor
of Cæsar had been proved useless, the successor of St. Peter had been
a very present help." Indirectly Attila was the strengthener of the
Papacy, and the founder of Venice. That stately and gorgeous city owes
its origin to the Italians who fled in terror before the brutal Huns
from ruined Padua to the islands and lagoons at the mouth of the
Piave.

In retiring, Attila had demanded once more the hand and dower of
Honoria, the disgraced sister of Theodosius II. But in 453 he added a
beautiful maiden, Ildico, to his innumerable wives. He retired from
the banquet after a deep carouse, and in the morning was found dead
amid a flood of gore by which he had been suffocated, while Ildico sat
weeping beneath her veil by the dead king's bedside. He died as a fool
dieth; and his warriors gashed their cheeks and wept tears of blood,
and gave him a splendid burial. And his name passed into legend as the
King Etzel of the Niebelungen Lied, and Alti of the Saga. But his
"loutish sons" quarrelled among themselves. The Teutons, Goths,
Gepidæ, Alani, and Heruli reasserted their independence in the great
victory of Netad in Pannonia in 454; and though the Huns left their
name in Hungary, henceforth the empire of Attila became mere
"drift-wood, on its way to inevitable oblivion."




CLOVIS THE FIRST

By THOMAS WYATT, A.M.

(465-511)

[Illustration: Clovis on horse. [TN]]


The honor of having established the French monarchy and the French
nation, of having raised himself from his position as chief of a petty
and turbulent tribe to be the ruler of a powerful and permanent
kingdom, unquestionably belongs to Clovis the First, who was born in
the year 465. The multitude of petty kingdoms subsisting in Gaul at
this time, forms, says an illustrious historian, one of the greatest
difficulties in the ancient history of France. In a manuscript work,
still preserved in the King's library at Paris, it is imputed to the
disorders which prevailed after the expulsion of Childeric, father of
Clovis, when such as were sufficiently powerful took advantage of the
anarchy in which the nation was involved, to establish independent
monarchies of their own. Clovis ascended the throne at the age of
fifteen, and at the early age of twenty began to show his jealousy
toward those whom he considered usurpers of his territories. His
courtiers, ever ready to fan into a flame the spark they had
discovered in the breast of their master, incited him to challenge
Syagrius, a Roman who still had possession of Soissons and a part of
the adjacent country.

The challenge was accepted by this self-made prince, and a bloody
battle was the result. Syagrius saved himself by flight, taking refuge
among the Visigoths; but Alaric II., then king, fearing the threats of
Clovis delivered the refugee into his power, who caused him to be
beheaded.

The Frankish leader was now a man of note in the world; but he was
still nothing more than the leader of a band of warriors, often
retaining his authority only by brute force. At one time, his band
having stormed the Christian city of Rheims and carried off from its
church a vase "of marvellous size and beauty," the bishop sent word to
their leader entreating him to return it. "That will I," responded
Clovis to the envoy, "if when we divide our spoil the vase falls to my
lot." In his desire to gratify the bishop, who was an old friend, the
chieftain went a step beyond his promise and requested his companions
to give him the great vase as his share. Then cried one of their
number, striking the trophy angrily with his axe, "No, you shall draw
lots with the rest of us, and take what comes honestly to you." His
comrades, however, felt that this was going too far. The vase was
given to their leader, and by him returned to Rheims. A year passed,
and Clovis gave no sign that he remembered the affront. Then, having
called his band together for a review, he passed them one by one,
examining and approving their arms, till, last of all, he reached the
warrior who had opposed him; and he eyed this man sternly. "Your
weapons suit you poorly," he said, "none of them are fit for service."
And, snatching the man's axe from him he threw it to the ground. The
other stooped to recover it, when, whirling up his own axe, Clovis
crashed it through the rebel's skull. "'Twas so you struck my vase,"
he cried.

Such a leader, who could so long await a fitting opportunity, and then
so sternly avenge an insult to his power, was well calculated to wield
great authority among these stern and hardy warriors. He had enjoyed
several years of uninterrupted tranquillity, when Basinus, King of
Thuringia, made a sudden irruption into that part of the dominions of
Clovis situated beyond the Rhine. Clovis was no sooner informed of
this invasion, than he assembled his army, and entering the enemy's
country, laid it waste with fire and sword, and imposed a perpetual
tribute on the offending monarch.

Clovis now bent his thoughts on the formation of an alliance by
marriage with some of the neighboring princes. He accordingly
despatched his ambassadors to the King of Burgundy, asking for the
hand of the Princess Clotildis, his niece, the accounts of whose
extraordinary piety and beauty had made a deep impression on his
heart. The court of Burgundy, fearful of offending a young and
powerful prince, whose arms had hitherto been everywhere victorious,
complied with his request.

Great preparations were made for the departure of the queen elect, and
she began her journey in a kind of wagon, called _basterne_, drawn by
oxen, which was the most elegant vehicle then in use. The marriage was
celebrated at Soissons, amid the joyful acclamations of the people.

Heaven smiled on this propitious union; Clotildis became mother of a
prince, who received baptism with the king's consent, and was named
Ingomer. The subsequent death of this child, on whom Clovis had so
firmly set his affections, inspired him, notwithstanding the prayers
and remonstrances of his affectionate and pious princess, with an
aversion to the Christian religion. He was prevailed on, however, to
suffer his second son to undergo the ceremony of baptism. He also was
attacked by a severe indisposition, but the prayers of this pious
woman were heard and answered, the young prince restored to health,
and the anxiety of his father dispelled.

[Illustration: Clovis punishing a rebel.]

The conversion to Christianity of Clovis, soon after this, is thus
related by historians: The Germans had commenced preparing for
incursions into the dominions of Clovis; he, being apprised of their
intentions, hastened to impede their progress, and met them on the
plains of Tolbiac, not far from Cologne, where a bloody battle was
fought. Clovis, perceiving that the strength of his army was
diminishing, lifted up his eyes to Heaven, and exclaimed, "God of my
Queen Clotildis, grant me victory, and I here vow to worship none
other than you." He immediately rallied his yielding forces, again led
the charge, pierced with irresistible ardor the enemy's battalions,
and entirely put them to flight. He then followed them into Germany,
where he dispersed the remains of the vanquished army, reduced to
obedience a nation hitherto invincible, and compelled them to pay him
an annual tribute.

Faithful to his vow, he requested to be made acquainted with the
mysteries of the Christian religion; and on Christmas-day, 496,
received baptism at the church of St. Martin, in Paris, from Remigius,
Bishop of Rheims, a prelate equally distinguished for his birth and
piety. His sister Albofleda, and about three thousand of his subjects,
followed his example. An improbable legend prevails, that during the
ceremony of the baptism of Clovis, a dove descended from Heaven,
bringing a phial of balsam, with which he was consecrated. This is
what is now called _La Sainte Ampoule_, the Holy Phial; which was kept
with extreme care, and contained the oil used by the monarchs of
France at their coronation.

The conversion of Clovis had not repressed his warlike ambition.
Brabant, the country of Liege, and that part of Flanders which was
situated on the sea-coast, had not yet submitted to the new conqueror
of Gaul.

The most considerable of these small states was the Arborici, a
Christian nation, firmly attached to the Christian religion, and
thence maintaining an enmity against the French, who were pagans. But
the recent conversion to Christianity of Clovis and so many of his
subjects, diminished the aversion of the people of this peaceful
nation; they were induced to consent to an alliance with him,
acknowledge him for their sovereign, and became subjects of the French
kingdom. The Roman garrisons, following the example, capitulated and
gave up all the places that were still in their possession, toward the
ocean and on the banks of the Rhine.

Clovis did not as yet consider his victories complete; the conquest of
Brittany was soon followed by that of Alaric II., King of the
Visigoths. Before the French set out on this latter expedition, they
made a vow not to shave themselves till they had subdued their
enemies. Vows of this kind were very common at that period. It was the
custom of those times to draw an omen from the verse that was
chanting, when a person entered the church. The king's envoys, at
their entrance into the church of St. Martin, heard these words from
the Psalms: "Thou hast endued me with strength for the wars; thou hast
supplanted those that had risen up against me; and hast put mine
enemies to flight." This fortunate prognostic was confirmed on the
banks of the Vienne. The army was at a loss where to pass that river,
when a hind plunged into the stream in sight of the whole camp, and
showed them a ford which still retains the name of the Passage of the
Hind.

The two armies met in the plains of Vouille, near Poictiers. Soon
after the commencement of the battle, the monarchs of either nation
perceiving each other, rushed forward at the same instant, and
engaged in single combat, when the superior skill and strength of
Clovis decided the victory in his favor; he dismounted his adversary,
and slew him on the spot. Nothing now remained to impede the progress
of the conqueror, who extended his empire from the banks of the Loire
to the Pyrenean mountains. Clovis then withdrew to Paris, and fixed
his residence in a palace in the southern part of the capital, which
had formerly been inhabited by the emperors Julian and Valentinian the
First. Success had hitherto attended all the plans of Clovis, and
allowing for the ferocious and martial spirit which then prevailed, he
had preserved his fame from any material pollution.

The assembling of the Council of Orleans was the last remarkable event
of the reign of Clovis, who died the same year, A.D. 511, at the age
of forty-five, and was buried in the church of Saint Peter and Saint
Paul, which he had caused to be built. It has been a subject of
dispute with historians, whether the military or the political talents
of this prince were the most eminent. Gaul, subdued by his arms,
preserved by his prudence, affords a proof that he was equally
skillful in the cabinet and formidable in the field.




BELISARIUS[8]

By CHARLOTTE M. YONGE

(505-565)

         [Footnote 8: Copyright, 1894, by Selmar Hess.]


Few men have performed greater achievements than this general, to whom
it was given to be conqueror again and again over nations hitherto
invincible, and to arrest, during his own lifetime, the disintegration
of the Roman Empire. He lived in the early part of the sixth century
of the Christian era, though the date of his birth is not certainly
known, and he was in the prime of life about 530. He is believed to
have been the son of a peasant of Thrace, probably of Slavonian
descent, as his name, stripped of its classical form, would belong to
that language and would be Beli-than, or the White Prince. Apparently
he began life as a common soldier, and gradually rose by courage and
ability. His master, the Emperor Justinian, was an equally remarkable
personage, capable of conceiving and accomplishing magnificent
designs, yet withal of a mean, ungenerous, ungrateful character. The
codification under Christian conditions of the old Roman law, so as to
serve as the foundation of jurisprudence to all the European nations
except the English; the building of the church of St. Sophia, and the
rolling back for a time the flood that on all sides was overwhelming
the ancient Empire of Rome were all due to this prince.

For the last two centuries the East and the West had been separated,
though sometimes coalescing under one head, but in 476, the last
titular Emperor of the West had been deposed. Italy had been the prey
of successive swarms of Teutonic nations. Vandals and Ostro-or Eastern
Goths had burst upon Rome, and while the Vandals proceeded to
devastate the great Roman province of Northern Africa and set up a
kingdom there, the Goths had established another in Italy.
Constantinople still held its ground as the magnificent capital of the
Eastern Empire, maintaining the old civilization, but her dominions
were threatened by the vigorous Persians on the east, and on the north
by the Bulgarians, a nation chiefly Slavonic and very savage and
formidable.

[Illustration: Man carrying a child. [TN]]

This was the inheritance to which Justinian succeeded, in right of his
uncle Justin, a successful soldier. He was forty-five years old at the
time, 527, having had an entirely civil and literary training, and
though warfare continued through the thirty-eight years of his reign,
he never once appeared at the head of his armies. Yet his foresight
and ambition were great, and he had not long been on the throne before
he decided on an endeavor to recover the African provinces. The
Vandals were Arian heretics, denying the Godhead and Eternity of our
Blessed Lord, and they had cruelly persecuted and constantly oppressed
the Catholics, who entreated the Eastern Empire to deliver them, so
that religious zeal added strength to Justinian's ambition. The
luxuries of Carthage and the other African cities had in a couple of
generations done much to destroy the vigor of the Vandals, so that the
conjuncture was favorable.

Belisarius had proved his abilities in a dangerous retreat in the
Persian war, but he probably owed his appointment to the African
expedition to his wife Antonina. She was the daughter of a charioteer
in the exhibitions of the hippodrome, which were loved to a
passionate, almost incredible degree, by the people of the Eastern
cities; and Theodora, the wife of the emperor was likewise the child
of one of these competitors in the races. Both ladies were devotedly
loved by their husbands, though scarcely worthy of their affection,
and it was thus that Belisarius obtained the opportunity for his
career, a curious parallel in this, as in other respects, to the great
Duke of Marlborough.

Belisarius only took on this expedition 10,000 foot and 6,000 horse,
picked men, with carefully selected officers, bred in the old Roman
discipline, for he much preferred a small army whom he could trust,
to a large and unwieldy host; and his fleet amounted to 500 vessels of
different sizes.

The expedition sailed from Heraclea in June, 533, and one of the first
acts of the general showed his sternness of discipline. A murder was
committed in a drunken fit by two Huns, and he immediately hung them
both, and silenced the murmurs of the rest by a speech in which he
declared that Roman arms must be carried in pure hands, and that no
courage would obtain pardon for violence or insubordination.

He landed in September at Caput Vadas, five days' distance from
Carthage, without opposition and with an eager welcome from the
natives, who rejoiced to be delivered from the Vandal oppression, and
Belisarius preserved their goodwill by hindering his soldiers from
committing any act of plunder or violence. Indeed Gelimer, king of the
Vandal horde, was only like an enemy occupying the place; there had
been no amalgamation, and persecution had sown seeds of bitter hatred.
Gelimer, however, marched out to meet the invaders, and at ten miles
from Carthage was totally defeated, and his brother and nephew killed.
He fled into the deserts of Numidia, recalling his brother who was
putting down a revolt in Sardinia, and leaving the city to Belisarius,
who entered on the feast of the great Carthaginian martyr, St.
Cyprian, amid the extreme joy of the populace. When the brother of
Gelimer returned from Sardinia there was still another battle to
fight, but as usual Belisarius conquered. Gelimer submitted and
received an estate in Galatia, and lived there in honor and prosperity
for the rest of his days. The bravest of his warriors took service in
the Roman army under their victor! Gelimer had, however, first to
march in the triumph of Belisarius, the only one ever held at
Constantinople! Justinian had recalled the general, though it would
have been far wiser to have left him to consolidate his conquest; but
no Roman emperor could be free from the suspicion that a victorious
general might become his rival, nor could the scrupulous loyalty of
Belisarius disarm him. It is said that Gelimer marched along,
repeating, "Vanity of vanities, all is vanity."

The next scheme of Justinian was the recovery of Italy from the Goths.
This people had never shown the same savage cruelty as the Vandals,
but had settled amicably among the Italians, and adopted much of their
civilization and learning. They had recently had a truly great
monarch, Theodoric, who deserves to rank with Alfred or Charlemagne,
but he had left only a daughter, Amalasanta, a noble woman, and an
ally of Justinian. She was stifled in her bath by Theodatus, the
husband whom she had raised to the throne. The Gothic kingdom was
convulsed by the crime, and Justinian saw both motive and opportunity
for conquest. Yet he only gave Belisarius 4,500 horse and 3,000
infantry when this great enterprise was begun in 535, besides some
choice troops of the imperial guard.

Sailing to Sicily he met no resistance except at Panormis (Palermo),
but observing that his masts overtopped the walls, he hung up small
rafts full of archers, whose arrows disconcerted the inhabitants so
that they surrendered, and the whole island was restored to the Roman
power. Theodatus tried to treat with Justinian, and while the
negotiations were going on, Belisarius crossed over to the African
province, which was threatened by the Moors of Mount Atlas. Strong
measures were needed, but for the time the incursions were repressed,
and by the time the bad faith of Theodatus had disgusted the Greeks,
Belisarius was ready to cross into Italy and besiege Naples. As usual,
the native inhabitants were his friends, but were in terror of the
Gothic garrison, and these, on their side, were afraid of treating
with the Greek general because Theodatus had their wives and children
as hostages.

Theodatus, however, shut himself up in Rome and gave no aid to Naples,
and Belisarius had made up his mind to raise the siege and attack Rome
itself, when one of his soldiers came to tell him that in exploring an
aqueduct which had been stopped, he had found that the passage for the
water could easily be enlarged so as to admit armed men. Once more he
summoned the native magistrates, but the inhabitants would not submit,
and he sent on the bravest of his men, with two trumpets and with
lanterns, while he made an attack to divert the attention of the
Goths. The way was long, and the soldiers found themselves in the very
heart of Naples, in a basin with very steep sides, impossible, as it
seemed, to climb. One man however, scrambled up and found himself in a
hovel, where he obtained a rope and pulled up his companions. The
Goths who were resisting the escalade, threw down their arms when they
were attacked from behind. Belisarius did his utmost to stop slaughter
and plunder, but could not entirely succeed, for many of his soldiers
were savage Huns, barely kept under restraint at any time.

Theodatus remained in Rome, and appointed a brave general called
Vetiges by the Greeks, but whose name was probably Wittich, to the
command. The army suspected treachery, raised Wittich on their shields
and proclaimed him king. Theodatus fled, and was murdered on his way,
in 536. Wittich thought it better to draw off to Ravenna to reorganize
his army, so the way to Rome was left open to Belisarius, who had only
to summon a small garrison to submit. He gained it in the March of
537, and immediately repaired the defences; and indeed there was need,
for Wittich besieged him there for a whole year, and he had terrible
difficulties to contend with. The Roman populace had lost all their
spirit of patriotism, and murmured from the first that with a mere
handful of soldiers, he should bring down the Goths upon them, and
when the distresses of a protracted siege came on them, they loudly
complained, though all the useless mouths were safely sent off by sea
to the fertile fields about Naples.

It is impossible to dwell at length on the events of the siege and the
gallant deeds on either side. The Goths, under Wittich, were gallant
enemies, but the diseases of the Campagna reduced their numbers, and
finally, late in the March of 538, Wittich broke up his camp and
retreated to Ravenna. There he called the Franks to his assistance,
but they were mere barbarians, who plundered Goths as well as Italians
and added to the general misery of the country. At last, in 539,
Wittich yielded Ravenna to Belisarius who sent him to Constantinople,
where he lived in honor and prosperity.

Justinian recalled his general, always fearing the result of his
success. The city of Pavia was still left to the Goths, and here they
chose as king, a kinsman of Wittich, called Totila, young, gallant,
and generous. The utter incapacity and greed of Justinian's governors
left the country open to him, and he traversed the whole peninsula
collecting Goths again to his standard, till their kingdom was
restored. Indeed the whole of the land was so desolate that hardly any
opposition was offered. In 544 Justinian was obliged to send
Belisarius back to Italy, but most insufficiently supplied with men
and money. He had in the meantime been fighting on the Persian
frontier, with the great King Chosroës, and with more success than
could have been hoped for with such means as were at his disposal. He
came to Ravenna, but his forces were too scanty to enable him to
undertake any enterprise, and where he did not command in person, the
so-called Roman captains were uniformly beaten. Totila occupied Rome
in 546, and tried to destroy it, overthrowing the walls and beginning
to ruin the ancient buildings. Belisarius wrote to him a remonstrance,
telling him how after-ages would regard such destruction, and he
actually thanked the great general for his advice and spared the
churches and monuments, but carried off all the inhabitants, so that
when, forty days later, Belisarius re-entered the city not a man was
found there. He tried to rebuild the defences, but Justinian would not
send him money or men, and when Totila again advanced, he was forced
to abandon the beloved and honored city. Justinian then recalled him,
preferring to leave Italy to its fate rather than trust to his
unswerving loyalty. An unwarlike despot, who knew that the will of an
army might at any time raise a popular captain in his stead, could
hardly fail to dread the one man who was beloved by his soldiers and
always successful. The Empress Theodora was dead, and no honors
awaited Belisarius, only undeserved suspicion.

Once again, however, the great man was called for. The Bulgarians were
desolating Thrace. There was an outcry that none but Belisarius could
save the Empire. He was placed at the head of only 300 old soldiers,
and found the peasants helpless and incapable, yet he succeeded in
repulsing the enemy and driving them beyond the Danube. The outcries
of admiration alarmed the emperor, now in his eightieth year, and the
notion that Belisarius, almost as old, must be a traitor, haunted him.
There was a real conspiracy, and the enemies of the general accused
him of sharing in it. The acts of accusation were read to the old man,
but he stood, listening and not answering a single word, no doubt in
his disdain. The emperor caused the brave old man's eyes to be put
out, and he was stripped of all his possessions. It is said that he
stood in front of his former palace with a wooden dish for alms.
"_Date obolum Belisario_," give a penny to Belisarius, has become a
proverb. However, Justinian seems to have repented, and he restored to
Belisarius his wealth and his palace, in which, shortly after, the old
man died on the 13th of March, 565, only eight months before his
ungrateful sovereign.

[Signature of the author.]

[Illustration: Belisarius receiving alms.]




CHARLES MARTEL

By HENRY G. HEWLETT

(694-741)

[Illustration: Fight on horses. [TN]]


Toward the close of the seventh century of our era, the kingdom which
we now name France was peopled by a half-barbarous, professedly
Christian race, of mixed tribes, the ruling portion of which
originally sprang from Germany. The Frankish kingdom, as it was
called, had risen upon the ruins of the Roman Empire, and for about a
century was remarkable for the ability of its sovereigns. But after
the death of King Dagobert I., in A.D. 638, the royal family seemed
devoid of any mental or moral strength whatsoever, and the kings of
this line have been always known as _fainéants_--weak idlers. The real
power of the government was held by a succession of chief officers of
the household, styled "Mayors of the Palace." The most distinguished
of these noblemen was Pepin d'Héristal, who, from the year 688 to his
death in 715, was virtually king of France--the nominal sovereigns
being but puppets in his hands. The country was then divided into two
great districts--the eastern, known as Austrasia; and the western, as
Neustria. At his death Pepin left the reins of government to his
grandson, Theodebald, an infant under the guardianship of his mother,
Plectrude. The lawful king, Dagobert III., was also a child. It was
clear that a fierce race of warriors required a strong arm to keep
them in check, and could not long brook an infant's sway. The
Neustrians commenced the revolt by expelling Theodebald and his
mother, and choosing for their ruler a Mayor of the Palace named
Raginfred. They then attacked Austrasia, which had not joined in the
revolt. It was without fitting defences, and had no able man to direct
its resistance against this assault. What course should the
Austrasians take? Pepin, as we have said, left the government of
France to a grandson; but he had a natural son, Charles, then in the
flower of his youth. Whether on account of his not having been born in
wedlock, or his having offended Pepin by some misconduct, Charles had
been slighted, and even hated, by his father, who banished him to a
monastery at Cologne, far from the intrigues of statecraft and the
tumult of war. "Here," said the Austrasians, "is the likeliest man for
our leader; a son of the wisest and firmest ruler the kingdom has yet
acknowledged." It was agreed, therefore, by the people, that he should
be invited to come, and a summons was sent from Metz, the then
capital of the district, to the cloister at Cologne. Young and brave,
pining in uncongenial society, and debarred from the employment of his
talents, Charles seized this opportunity of release. Eagerly accepting
the invitation, he hastened to return with the messengers, and soon,
amidst the shouts of the delighted Austrasians, put himself at their
head, under the title of Duke. The family of Pepin was not royal, and
Charles doubtless saw the wisdom of yielding to the popular reverence
for the ancient race of kings. The Neustrians had the same prejudice;
and, accordingly, while Charles in the one district, and Raginfred in
the other, virtually governed, their respective tools were Clothaire
IV., King of Austrasia, and Chilperic II., King of Neustria, two
descendents of the old dynasty. These events took place in A.D. 716.

The two countries now prepared for war. The Franks of Neustria were
not so thoroughly and habitually warlike as their brethren of
Austrasia, whose military system was better developed, in consequence
of their position near the Rhine continually exposing them to
conflicts with bands of Germans, which crossed the river in hopes of
conquest. Nevertheless, the Austrasian Franks were now at a
disadvantage, by reason of the unprepared state in which the Neustrian
attack found them. Charles and Raginfred collected each an army, and
marched at its head. The encounter was for some time doubtful, but the
Neustrians gained a considerable advantage in the first campaign, and
Charles was obliged to seek an asylum in the forests of the Ardennes
region. Here, however, he did not long remain in concealment. Issuing
forth at the head of a fresh body of men, he came upon the Neustrian
army by surprise. A fearful slaughter took place, which he followed up
by a vigorous pursuit. The Neustrians made a stand at Vincy, near
Cambray. Charles met them here, and after a gallant struggle
completely routed the force of Raginfred. This victory decided the
fate of Neustria, and the crown of both countries was, in the year
719, placed on the head of Chilperic II. Either from motives of policy
or of generosity, Charles did not abuse his success by the punishment
of his rival, Raginfred, on whom he conferred the earldom and province
of Anjou. He himself was content to remain sole Mayor of the Palace,
under a show of obedience to a powerless king.

A brave, iron-willed man, this Charles Martel appears to us--dimly as
the light of historic tradition permits us to behold him. He made his
army the sole engine of his power, and cultivated it to the fullest
extent then possible to him. Even the Church was not able to resist
him; and at his pleasure he seized on benefices which he deemed too
important to be placed in priestly hands, and bestowed them on his
warriors. A rebellion among the nobles of Aquitaine demanded his
attention; and thither he marched with ruthless determination,
stemming revolt and establishing order. But he had a work to do in his
generation far more important to Europe than any he had yet performed.

The Arab tribes, which in the last century had been converted, by the
genius of Mohammed, from idolatry to the worship of God, and from
lawless bandits into disciplined soldiers, were at this period
pursuing their career of religious conquest into the heart of
Christendom. The Gothic monarchy of Spain, under its last king,
Roderick, had fallen beneath the invading force, which now threatened
France. The Duchy of Aquitaine, which considered itself independent of
France, but which Charles had reduced to comparative submission,
opposed the only barrier to Arabian aggression. Eudes (or Eudin), then
Duke, was a gallant prince, and did all that in him lay to resist the
claim which the new lords of Spain asserted to his province of
Septimania (Languedoc). He defeated one invading army before Toulouse
in the year 721; but the tide of invasion still flowed in. He then
tried intrigue, and bestowed his daughter on Musa, a revolted general
of the great Arabian leader, Abd-er-rahman. But all was in vain. In
732 the Moslem once more appeared, in tremendous force, all over the
south of France, ravaging as they came, finally besieging Arles and
defeating its relieving army.

The wives and children of the invaders followed in their train, as
though they intended to settle in the country. Abd-er-rahman was
advancing yet farther on his victorious way, when Eudes, as a last
resource, applied for aid to his enemy, Charles. What were personal
enmities now? This common, national danger must be averted at all
hazards. So thought Eudes when he sent to Charles. So thought Charles
when he quickly summoned an army, and marched toward the plains
between Poitiers and Tours, where the Arabs were quartered. The
importance of the struggle that ensued cannot well be over-estimated.
Christianity and Mohammedanism were at issue for the possession of
Europe. The difficulties that lay in the way of the success of Charles
were very great. The Arabs were animated with the fanatical zeal of a
new faith, and a greedy desire of domination. The Franks, on the other
hand, were probably not at all conscious of, or concerned for, the
religious interests which were at stake, and aimed at no more than a
vigorous rebuff of an unprovoked assault. They had the advantage of
familiarity with the country and climate; but were outmatched, beyond
comparison, in numbers. The old monkish chronicles tell us that the
battle lasted seven days. The Arab army was mainly composed of cavalry
and bowmen, and the Franks suffered greatly from the charges of the
former and the unerring shots of the latter. But on the seventh day
the combatants closed with each other. Heavily fell the iron hands of
the sturdy Franks upon the sinewy, but slender frames of their Asiatic
opponents. Nevertheless, Charles had no cavalry; and the swift steeds
of Arabia, with their daring riders, trampled down his battalions.
Suddenly there was a cry in the rear of the Moslem army that the
infidels were spoiling the camp. More eager to save their treasure
than to slay their foes, the Arabs turned in this direction. Skilfully
interpreting the movement as a flight, Charles cheered on his men to
pursue. The crisis was fatal to Abd-er-rahman. He tried to rally his
cavalry. It was too late; and he fell, pierced through with many a
Frankish spear. Night separated the contestants, and when in the
morning the Franks would have renewed the battle, they found that
their foes had stolen away in the night, fled, leaving their treasure
and their dead upon the field. The incredible number of 300,000 Arabs
is said to have fallen in this memorable defeat. The remainder fled
through Aquitaine before the avenging sword of Charles. Well was he
named "Martel," from the hammer-like might of his good arm! Who can
say whether France and Germany, ay, England and all Europe, might not
at this hour be sunk in such poverty and degradation of moral and
intellectual life as Turkey now exhibits, had Charles Martel and his
bold Franks fought less valiantly and enduringly at Tours?

History tells us but little more of Charles. He carried his arms into
the Netherlands, conquered the Frisians and other tribes which then
dwelt there, made them Christians by force, and vassals of the
Frankish crown. In Saxony, and other parts of Germany also, his power
was feared and obeyed. Pope Gregory II. offered to transfer to him the
allegiance due from Rome to the Greek emperor, but the scheme was
ended by the death of Charles. After the decease of King Chilperic
II., in 720, Thierry IV. reigned in the same feeble manner as the
other kings of his degenerate race. On his death, in 736, the people
did not care to appoint a successor, being satisfied with the
government which Charles continued to exercise under the title of
"Duke of the Franks." He died in 741, at the age of forty-seven,
leaving the monarchy to his three sons, Pepin, Carloman, and Griffo.
Of the elder of these, we shall hear more anon. Charles Martel is the
first hero who succeeded in stamping his image upon the surface of
European history, after the chaos of the broken Roman empire had in
some measure yielded to the spirit of order. He was chieftain of an
unruly tribe, rather than king of a settled state. In this light we
must regard him if we would judge his character fairly; and thus
considered, he may be said to have governed France wisely and well. If
his memory cannot be cleared from the reproach of certain deeds of
violence, we can afford to pardon him when we remember the good
service that his strong hammer once wrought for Europe.




PEPIN THE SHORT

By HENRY G. HEWLETT

(714-768)

[Illustration: Charles Martel at Tours.]


Charles Martel, as we have seen, was never king of the Franks, and his
sons were too politic to assume the title on his death. Griffo, the
third son, may be dismissed from our notice at once, as he was from
the government of the kingdom, his brothers, Carloman and Pepin,
taking advantage of his weakness to dispossess him. After this act of
supremacy they were for some time content to act as Mayors of the
Palace, in the districts of Neustria and Austrasia respectively, under
the nominal sovereignty of Childeric III., the last of the _fainéant_
kings, whom they set up as a puppet. Carloman distinguished himself by
attacking the Saxons and other tribes which threatened aggression;
and in 744 Pepin severely punished a revolt of his father's old enemy
(Eudes, Duke of Aquitaine), who, as already stated, had been compelled
to do homage to the Frankish crown. Pepin soon had no sharer in his
power or fame. Carloman was not made for a soldier, and, under the
sudden impulse of devotional feeling, resigned his office in 747, and
retired into a Roman monastery.

[Illustration: Ox carriage in a forest. [TN]]

Pepin, thus left sole lord of France, did not hastily attempt to cut
prejudice against the grain. Feeling his way gradually, he sounded
popular opinion for three years, on the subject of changing the royal
dynasty, and placing the crown on the head of one who had a good right
arm to defend it. Finding himself strong enough at last to take
decided measures, he quietly dethroned Childeric III.; and shaving off
his long hair, the symbol of royalty among the early Frankish kings,
sent him to one monastery at St. Omer, and his son Thierry to another
at Fontenelle. This accomplished, Pepin proceeded to obtain
justification for his acts from the Pope. This was a novel step; for
although the bishops of Rome had great spiritual influence over
Christendom, in virtue of their alleged descent from St. Peter, their
temporal authority was by no means admitted out of their own diocese.
Pepin was a wise man in his generation, though short-sighted as far as
posterity was concerned. He saw clearly enough that no sanction which
he could obtain for his acts was likely to be so binding upon the
minds of his subjects, and the world at large, as that pronounced by a
power which had already fastened its yoke on the soul and conscience.
The Pope, Zachariah, was not insensible to the importance of the
Frankish monarchy, being at the time of Pepin's accession especially
in need of help against Astolpho, king of the Lombards, who threatened
to seize on the Eternal City itself. When, therefore, Pepin's envoys
arrived at Rome, and conveyed their master's application, the pontiff
did not hesitate to answer that it was truly fitting for one to be
king in name who was king in deed. Thus fortified against opposition,
Pepin proceeded to fulfil all the ceremonies attaching to the kingly
dignity. He and his queen, Bertha, were duly crowned and consecrated
by Boniface, the "Apostle of Germany," and Bishop of Mainz. This rite
was performed at Soissons, in 752, with all the pomp that the Jewish
kings had been wont to employ on such occasions. The national assembly
was summoned; and in presence of the great Frank nobles Boniface
produced a phial of oil, announcing it as that which had fallen from
heaven on the day when the first king of the Franks (Clovis) had
received baptism. The sacred oil was then poured upon the head of
Pepin, and amid the acclamations of nobles, soldiers, and peasants, he
was crowned their king.

He was a man, like his father, well fitted to rule over a warlike and
rude people. What was most admired in a king at that period was
personal courage, and, what was most needed, strength of will. Pepin
had both; but he had one defect which, though to us it may seem a
trifle, to men who prized the body far more than soul or mind, was a
serious matter. He was of small stature, and acquired the name of "the
Short" in consequence. Fully conscious that this was a disadvantage to
him, and, indeed, hearing his name once derided by his courtiers,
Pepin took a speedy opportunity of proving that what he lacked in
height he more than made up in strength and bravery. It was common in
those days to exhibit animal fights at the Frankish court, as indeed,
to her shame be it spoken, is common in Spain to this day. On one of
these occasions a lion and a bull were engaged in a savage and mortal
struggle. Pepin and his courtiers were seated round the arena looking
on, when suddenly the king started up, and cried: "Who will dare to
separate those beasts?" There was a dead silence. The attempt was
madness--certain destruction. Unsheathing his sword, and glancing
scornfully round upon his courtiers, Pepin leapt into the arena, and
drew the attention of the combatants upon himself. Raging with fury,
they turned to attack him; but with cool and measured steps he evaded
their onset, and by a succession of well-aimed blows struck off, one
after the other, the heads of lion and bull. Then, throwing down his
streaming sword, he accosted the astonished courtiers: "Am I worthy to
be your king?" A deafening shout was the reply, and the name of "Pepin
the Short" was no longer a term of derision but of honor.

Having thus established his reputation for those qualities which were
most essential to his influence, Pepin took measures to render it
permanent by acts of wisdom and liberality. He frequently called
together the national assemblies, and included in the summons bishops
as well as chieftains. Consulting with them as to the most prudent
course of action, he preserved their affection to his person and
obedience to his orders. He especially courted the favor of the
Church, and showed his gratitude for the sanction which Pope Zachariah
had given to his accession, by assisting the next Pope, Stephen III.,
in a serious contest which broke out in 753 with the Lombards. Their
king, Astolpho, took an active part in the great religious quarrel
which then agitated Christendom, with respect to the worship of
images, espousing the cause of the image-breakers, while Pope Stephen
supported the opposite side. Threatened with invasion, the Pope flew
to the court of Pepin, who received him with much reverence, and in
return was crowned king for the second time. Stephen even pronounced
sentence of excommunication against all who should dare to choose a
king of France from any other than Pepin's family. At the Pope's
request the king assembled an army, and marched against Astolpho. The
war lasted for two years, but eventually terminated in the success of
Pepin, who compelled Astolpho to yield up to the Pope the exarchate of
Ravenna, the last relic of the great Roman empire in Italy, and of
which the Lombards had deprived the Eastern emperors.

[Illustration: Pepin after the murder of Duke Waifre.]

Pepin, however, had in view a more national war than this. The duchy
of Aquitaine was perpetually in a state of resistance to the authority
of the Frankish kings. This was owing, in some measure, to the
difference of language and civilization which prevailed between the
people of the duchy and those of the kingdom. A spirit of hostility
was also fostered by the increase of population which Aquitaine
obtained from the Gascons, a tribe from the Pyrenees, not subject to
the Franks. After a long period of uncertain warfare, Pepin determined
to decide the struggle by active operations. He accordingly, in 759,
took advantage of a rising of the people of Septimania against their
Arabian rulers. He made himself master of Narbonne and other towns,
and freed the Septimanians. Then turning upon Waifre, Duke of
Aquitaine, he summoned him to disgorge the spoils which he had seized
from the Aquitanian lands of certain churches of France. Waifre
replied in defiant terms, and for nine years resisted the attempts of
Pepin to reduce him to submission. It was a sanguinary and desolating
war. The fairest districts of Auvergne, Limousin, and Berry, were laid
waste and burnt by Pepin; and in the Frankish territories Waifre
levied an equally terrible retribution. He was murdered at last by
some of his own subjects, at the instigation of the Frankish king.
This is the one instance of actual crime which we find recorded
against Pepin; and legend tells that its shadow rested heavily upon
his mind. Aquitaine was annexed to the kingdom.

It was Pepin's last achievement. He did not, as we might have expected
he would, die in harness on the battle-field, but of dropsy, at the
age of fifty-four. This event occurred in 768, at St. Denis. Long
before his death he had obtained the coronation of his two sons,
Charles and Carloman, jointly with his own, and directed his
territories to be divided between them.

To be the successful founder of a new dynasty demands a genius which
we may justly entitle heroic, expressive as that word is of strength
of character merely, without regard to moral worth. Pepin, however,
was not devoid of the latter, to a limited extent, and has left a
memory which, if not remarkable for virtue, is at least not disfigured
by vice.




CHARLEMAGNE

By SIR J. BERNARD BURKE

(742-814)


The birthplace of Charlemagne is unknown, but from various data we may
infer that he was born somewhere about the year 742, nearly seven
years before his father, Pepin the Short, assumed the title of king.
His mother was Bertha, daughter of Charibert, Count of Leon.

Of his boyhood we know as little as of his birth, but he seems at an
early age to have mingled in the real business of life, for when only
twelve years old we find him despatched to receive and welcome the
sovereign pontiff who came to implore his father's aid against the
barbarians that threatened Rome. From the usual habits of the Franks,
it is also probable that he accompanied Pepin in his campaigns at an
early age; but the first time that we really see him in the field, is
on the renewal of the war with the rebellious Duke of Aquitaine.

[Illustration: Charlemagne.]

Upon the death of Pepin, 768, Charlemagne and his younger brother,
Carloman, succeeded to equal portions of one of the most powerful
European kingdoms, bounded by the Pyrenees, the Alps, the
Mediterranean, and the ocean. But this would hardly have enabled the
monarchs, even had they been united, to resist successfully the
incursions of the barbarous tribes on the German frontiers of France,
which had commenced with the first establishment of the Frankish
dominion in Gaul; and which was kept alive by the constant pouring out
of fresh hordes from the overpopulated North. The situation of
Charlemagne was rendered yet more perilous by the passive enmity of
his brother, and the rebellion of Hunald, the turbulent Duke of
Aquitaine. But fortunately, Charlemagne had a genius equal to the
difficulties of his situation; though his brother refused to aid him,
he defeated Hunald; and no less illustrious by his clemency than by
his valor and military skill, he forgave the vanquished rebel.

Desiderius, the king of Lombardy, had made large encroachments upon
the states of the Roman pontiff, whose cause was taken up by
Charlemagne. This led to feuds, which Bertha, the mother of the
Frankish king, endeavored to appease by bringing about a union between
her son and the daughter of the Lombard. But Charlemagne soon took a
disgust to the wife thus imposed upon him, and repudiated her, that he
might marry Hildegarde, the daughter of a noble family in Suabia.

In 771 Carloman died, and Charlemagne was elected to the vacant
throne, to the exclusion of his nephews, whose extreme youth, indeed,
made them incapable of wearing the crown in such troubled times.
Gilberga, the widow of Carloman, immediately fled, and sought an
asylum with Desiderius, the common place of refuge for all who were
hostile to the Frankish monarch. But the attention of Charlemagne was
called off to a more immediate danger from the Saxons, of whom the
Frisons were either a branch or the perpetual allies. Had the tribes
of which this people were composed been united under one head, instead
of being governed by various independent chiefs, the result would
probably have been fatal to France. Such a day, however, might come; a
second Attila might arise; and with a full conviction of these
perils, Charlemagne, when he marched against the barbarians,
determined to put them down effectually. He took and destroyed the
famous temple of the Irminsule, the great idol of their nation--that
is, the Hermansaule, or Pillar of Hermann, which had originally been
raised to commemorate the defeat of the Roman Varus by that hero,
though in time the name had got corrupted, and the cause of its
erection been forgotten. The Saxons were too wise to meet their
powerful opponent in the field, and when, as often happened, they were
brought to bay, they made a feigned submission, and obtained mercy by
vows they never meant to keep. Meanwhile events had been taking place
in another quarter, that called away Charlemagne, and obliged him to
leave his generals to watch over them.

The Lombard king, Desiderius, had made use of his absence to plunder
the papal see, to which Adrian had now succeeded. With some difficulty
the Pope contrived to give his friend notice of his danger, when
Charlemagne assembled a vast army, one division of which he himself
led into Italy over the Alps by Mount Cenis, while the other was
conducted to the same ground by his uncle, Duke Bernard, over the Mons
Jovis, or Mount Joux, which from this event received the name it has
borne ever since, of the Great Saint Bernard. Although surprised by an
invasion from a quarter so unexpected, Desiderius marched out to meet
his enemy, but his flank being turned, he fled hastily to Pavia,
without having struck a blow; Charlemagne pursued the fugitives, but
finding the city too strong to be taken by storm, he blockaded it with
one portion of his army, while with the other he proceeded against
Verona, having reduced which, he returned to the siege of Pavia. Month
after month passed, till at length Easter approached, when, leaving
the city blockaded as before, he determined to visit Rome in his
capacity of patrician or governor. His march through the Italian towns
was one of uninterrupted triumph; everywhere he was met with
acclamations, and at Rome he was received by the Pope, as well as the
people, with the liveliest expressions of gratitude for having freed
them from the tyranny of the Lombards. The friendship then cemented
between Adrian and his young deliverer lasted through the remainder of
their lives without any serious interruption.

Having thus asserted his rights of Patrician or Exarch, Charlemagne
was liberal in his donations to the Church, and soon afterward
returned to the siege of Pavia, which it now became important for him
to bring to a speedy conclusion, the Saxons having again taken
advantage of his absence to ravage his frontiers. About the middle of
the year, the city surrendered, and he was crowned with the iron crown
of Lombardy. He then marched against the Saxons, defeating them
whenever they ventured to make a stand, till they found their best
resource was in submission.

It was not long before a fresh revolt amongst the Lombards recalled
him to their country. Once more he was victorious and once more he was
summoned from his career of conquest to meet the Saxons. As usual,
they were beaten out of the field, and so completely, that many of
them, seeming to have lost all faith in their gods, from repeated
defeats, presented themselves with their wives and children to receive
baptism.

Amid all these fatigues and battles, which might appear sufficient to
have occupied the attention of any one man, Charlemagne retained in
his own hands the general government of the state. The local
administration was distributed among twelve provincial officers, with
the title of Dukes, each of them having the command of a county.
Subordinate to these officers were the Counts, who, in fact, were the
judges of the land, and had full authority to decide and punish within
their jurisdiction. To secure the faithful performance of their duties
by these Dukes and Counts, certain officers, under the name of Missi
Dominici, were sent in visitations from time to time to inquire into
their conduct. In great ecclesiastical questions, or those affecting
the more powerful vassals of the crown, either the king himself, or
the count of his palace, sat as judge.

Spain next demanded his attention. That country had been subdued by
the Arabs, but the descendants of the first conquerors quarrelled
among themselves, and Ibn al Arabi, a powerful chief, sought aid of
Charlemagne, who marched thither, and being, as usual, victorious,
secured to himself a barrier against the Saracens and Gascons. This
was seen with ill-will by Lupo, Duke of Gascony, who when the Frankish
king was leaving Spain to meet fresh dangers on the Rhine,
treacherously laid an ambush for his destruction in the gorges of the
Pyrenees. The monarch himself was allowed to pass with the first
division of his army, the second was assailed and destroyed in the
valley of Roncesvalles, and the conquerors secreting themselves in
their mountain fastnesses, presented no object for the vengeance of
the indignant monarch. Besides, the barbarians were again ravaging his
frontiers, under the command of Witikind, with a fierceness that went
far beyond even the worst of their earlier incursions. Their cruelty,
however, was retaliated by their almost total annihilation while
attempting to retreat across the Adern, and in the ensuing season
Charlemagne reduced them, as it seemed, to a state of total
submission. But no sooner had he set out for Italy, whither he was
called by many pressing affairs, than Witikind, the great leader of
the Westphalians, started forth from his retreat in Denmark and
stimulated all Saxony to a renewed contest. The time was well chosen.
Witikind, who appears to have been as superior to the generals of
Charlemagne as he was inferior to the king himself, gave the Franks a
complete overthrow.

[Illustration: Charlemagne at Witikind's baptism.]

When these tidings were brought to Charlemagne, he returned in all
haste to the northern frontiers. The scene was at once reversed. Cowed
by his name alone, they had recourse, as usual, to submission,
guaranteed by oaths which they never meant to keep, and by hostages
who did not hesitate to incur the fatal penalty attached to the
certain faithlessness of their countrymen. But this time the king
would listen to no terms short of ample vengeance. He demanded that
four thousand of the most hostile and turbulent should be delivered up
to him, all of whom he had executed in one day, in order to do by
intimidation what he had failed to do by kindness. His severity,
however, failed in producing the desired effect. It was not long
before the Saxons again flew to arms, when they sustained so signal a
defeat that very few of all their host escaped from the bloody field.
Yet still the spirit of the barbarians, supported by an indomitable
passion for war and plunder, continued as little quelled as ever.
Witikind and Albion, their most popular chiefs, still maintained the
contest, even when suffering nothing but disasters, until at length,
their conqueror, subduing them more by policy than by arms, won them
over to the Christian faith, which was then embraced by all Saxony.[9]
This, for the time, produced a better feeling, though the truce was
not of long duration.

         [Footnote 9: Witikind was baptized with solemn ceremony by
         the great bishops of the realm, in presence of his conqueror.
         Paul Thumann has vividly portrayed the scene in the painting
         here copied.]

Hildegarde, the wife of Charlemagne, had now been dead some short
time, when he married Fastrada, the daughter of a Frankish noble. It
is said that from this union there arose a spirit of discontent among
some of the leading men of his nation, who in consequence rebelled
against him; but, finding themselves too weak to contend with him,
dispersed, and endeavored to find safety in concealment. They did not,
however, escape their merited punishment. Being sooner or later taken,
some had their eyes put out, others were degraded from their rank,
none were condemned to death, but all to exile. Even these severe
examples did not prevent the rise of many petty revolts, the different
parts of which the Frankish kingdom was composed not being as yet
sufficiently amalgamated; but they were suppressed by the united
wisdom and vigor of the monarch.

The short interval of peace now allowed him, Charlemagne employed in
endeavoring to educate and civilize his people. He made a tour through
his dominions, spreading local and general improvement, reforming
laws, advancing knowledge, and building churches and monasteries,
Christianity being one of the chief means to which he trusted for the
attainment of his grand objects. In this he was no less successful
than he had before been in war. With the exception of the Eastern
Empire, France was now the most cultivated nation in Europe, even Rome
herself sending thither for skilful workmen, while commerce, roads,
and mechanics must have been much advanced, as we may infer from the
facility with which marble columns and immense stone crosses were
often carried through the whole extent of France upon carriages of
native construction. Luxury, too, with its attendant arts, had made
considerable strides. Vases of gold and silver richly carved, silver
tables brightly wrought, bracelets, rings, and table-cloths of fine
linen, might be seen in the houses of the nobles. The people must have
been dexterous in working iron, for their superiority in this respect
is evinced by the severe laws forbidding the exportation of arms.

The calm, thus wisely employed, did not last long. Charlemagne was
soon aroused from his peaceful occupations to put down a revolt of
Tassilo, Duke of Bavaria, as well as a meditated attack upon Italy by
Adalgisus, the son of the deposed Lombard king, Desiderius, who was
assisted underhand by the Greek empress, Irene, and had besides formed
a secret alliance with the Duke of Beneventum. Tassilo, being seized,
was condemned to death by the great council. He appealed to the
clemency of the king, who, ever averse to shed blood, mitigated the
sentence into a lifelong seclusion from the world in a cloister.
Adalgisus was met by the Duke of Beneventum, not to assist him, as he
had expected, but to oppose him, for the duke had in good time
discovered that loyalty was more likely to prosper than treason. He
therefore joined the army of France under Grimwold, and in the battle
which succeeded the Greek forces were entirely routed, and Adalgisus
disappears from the busy scene.

The empire of Charlemagne was next to be assailed by the Huns, not the
same people whose fathers had fought under Attila, though probably
descended from the same stock. Upon the death of that ferocious
conqueror, the tribes whom his talents had kept united, again
sundered. Shortly afterward a warlike nation, calling themselves
Avars, approached the northern parts of Europe, having been driven
from their native country by the Turks. They spread rapidly, acquiring
territory and power, until they were invited by Tassilo to aid him in
his meditated treachery. They lost more than one battle against the
Franks, but neither their own defeat, nor the total overthrow of their
ally, made any change in their purposes. They persisted; fought a hard
battle, and were so utterly routed, that they drew back and remained
quiet for a while, in order to collect their strength before venturing
upon a fresh contest with their tremendous adversary, who, on his
part, was no less desirous of a respite for the same object. Little
rest, however, was allowed him. No sooner had he beaten back these
Huns, than he had to contend with a new enemy, the Weletabes, a
Slavonian tribe inhabiting the northern part of Germany, near
Brandenburg and Pomerania, from the Elbe to the Baltic. In themselves
they might not have excited much alarm, but, if they met with only a
temporary success, their example might have been fatal, by rousing the
Saxons, who still with reluctance submitted to the yoke imposed upon
them. The king, therefore, without loss of time, met and defeated the
Weletabes; when he received them into grace, and ever afterward found
them faithful.

Having freed himself from this peril, Charlemagne next found that he
must turn his arms against the Huns of Hungary, which appears to have
been defended by them after a singular fashion. The whole country was
surrounded by nine circles of double palisading, formed of trunks of
trees twenty feet in height. The interstices of the palisade were
twenty feet wide, filled with stone and lime compacted, the top being
covered with earth, and planted with shrubs. At the distance of twenty
Teutonic, or forty Italian miles, was a second fortified line of the
same kind; and thus the circles were repeated, the circumference
always narrowing till you came to the innermost, or ring, in which the
Avars kept all their wealth, the accumulation of centuries of rapine.
Such, at least, is the account, however improbable, handed down to us
by an historian of the day.

In the outset fortune favored Charlemagne as usual. He took the first
three of the defensive circles sword in hand, and laid waste the
country to the junction of the Raab with the Danube, while his son
Pepin had met and routed their army in another quarter. But unhappily
a pestilential disease broke out among the horses, who died by
thousands, and he was obliged to retreat, unpursued, however, by the
Avars, their surprise and terror not having yet subsided.

In the doubtful lull that followed, a conspiracy was raised against
the life and throne of the monarch, in which his natural son, Pepin
the Hunchback, was implicated. It was discovered in time, and all the
conspirators were put to death, with the exception of Pepin, who was
confined for life within a monastery.

Scarcely had the king escaped this danger, than he was alarmed by news
that the Saxons had revolted, and uniting themselves with the Huns,
had given a bloody defeat to his cousin, Theodoric. Close upon this
came other tidings of equally evil import. In the late campaign
against the Huns, Charlemagne had called to his aid his son Pepin,
King of Italy, who, notwithstanding he was himself embroiled with
Grimbald, Duke of Beneventum, did not hesitate to obey. To reward this
prompt obedience, Charlemagne early in the winter had despatched
another son, Louis, King of Aquitaine, to the help of his brother,
when the Saracens took advantage of the latter's absence to attack his
frontiers, and even penetrated to Narbonne before any forces were
ready to oppose them. From this expedition they returned home laden
with plunder, and satisfied with this success, remained for a while in
quiet. Charles therefore had a brief respite to turn against the
Saxons; and as he had hitherto found all his precautions unavailing to
keep them within the bounds of good order, he broke up the nation, and
transported an immense number of the most turbulent to a distance from
their own country. Multitudes of men, women, and children were
dispersed over France, and not a few were transported to Brabant and
various parts of Flanders.

About this time, 793, the first collision took place between the
Franks and the piratical Northmen.

It would be alien from our present purpose to follow Charlemagne step
by step in his march of conquest and civilization. We need only say in
general terms, that he drove back the Arabs, reduced the Huns, became
the friend of Haroun al Raschid, his only rival in the paths of
greatness, and effectually protected his long line of coast from the
attempted incursion of the Northmen. It is said that upon one occasion
he arrived at a certain port just as the pirates were preparing to
land; but the moment they by some means learnt the presence of the
monarch, they immediately fled in terror at his mere name. He remained
gazing on the departing vessels, while the tears rolled down his
cheeks. His nobles could not help showing surprise at such unusual
emotion in the monarch, which being observed by him he exclaimed, "I
weep not, my friends, because I myself fear these miserable savages;
but I weep that they should dare to show themselves upon my coast
while I am living, for I foresee the evils they will bring upon my
people when I am dead."

It was always an object of first importance with Charlemagne to
support the papal authority, as holding out the only means of
spreading Christianity, which he justly considered the most effectual
instrument he could employ to enlighten and civilize the world. An
attempt had been made to mutilate the Pope, and thus disqualify him
for his office, by Campulus and Paschal, two disappointed aspirants
to the papacy; but he escaped from their hands and brought his
complaints before Charlemagne. The conspirators then attempted to
justify the deed, by accusing the Pope of atrocious crimes; and the
king calling to his aid certain of the Roman prelates, proceeded to
sit in judgment on him. The prelates, however, declared that by all
the canonical rules they could not judge their superior; and Leo
therefore was allowed, according to an old custom, to purge himself,
by a solemn oath, of the crimes which had been laid to his charge.

Many motives of policy at this time induced the Pope to set up an
emperor of the West in opposition to the Eastern Empire. It was
Christmas-day, when, with the rest of the Catholic world, Charlemagne
presented himself in the church of St. Peter. At the desire of the
Romans he was dressed in the long robe of the patrician, and
unsuspicious, it is said, of the honor intended him, knelt at the high
altar; but, just as he was about to rise, Leo advanced, and suddenly
placed upon his head the crown of the Western world, amidst the
popular acclamations, "Long life and victory to Charles Augustus,
crowned by God, great and pacific Emperor of the Romans!"

To end the long-existing feuds between the Western and Eastern
Empires, Charlemagne now proposed to marry Irene, who, having deposed
her son and put out his eyes, had usurped the throne of
Constantinople. Irene herself was not unwilling to accept the offer;
but she was overruled by a faction, and a treaty of peace was
substituted for a treaty of marriage. But while the negotiations were
going on, Irene herself was deposed by the great treasurer,
Nicephorus, who even refused to grant her the smallest pittance, so
that the degraded empress was obliged to support herself by the labors
of the distaff. He was, however, glad to conclude a peace with
Charlemagne.

Though troubled from time to time by disputes among the neighboring
barbarians, the Frankish monarch might now be said to enjoy peace; and
while still in the possession of robust health, he resolved to prepare
for death, by allotting among his children such portions of territory
as he wished them to possess when he should be removed from the scene.
Both his sons and the people willingly consented to the proposed
arrangements, which, indeed, bore the stamp of his usual wisdom and
justice. But the advanced age which he attained, brought with it the
usual evils of protracted life. He saw his friends and children swept
away before him. His son Louis alone remained to inherit his vast
dominions. With this single drawback the remainder of his time was as
prosperous as his earlier career had been; till at length, being
suddenly attacked with pleurisy, he expired, after a short illness, in
the seventy-second year of his age and the forty-seventh of his reign,
January 28, 814.




OLAF TRYGGVESON

Extracts from "Early Kings of Norway," by THOMAS CARLYLE

(955-1000)

[Illustration: Boat on the sea. [TN]]


Olaf Tryggveson also makes a great figure in the Faröer Saga, and
recounts there his early troubles, which were strange and many. He is
still reckoned a grand hero of the North, though his _vates_ now is
only Snorro Sturrleson of Iceland. Tryggveson had indeed many
adventures in the world. His poor mother, Astrid, was obliged to fly
with him, on murder of her husband[10] by Gunhild--to fly for life,
three months before her little Olaf was born. She lay concealed in
reedy island, fled through trackless forests, reached her father's
with the little baby in her arms, and lay deep-hidden there; tended
only by her father himself; Gunhild's pursuit being so incessant and
keen as with sleuth-hounds. Poor Astrid had to fly again deviously to
Sweden, to Esthland (Esthonia), to Russia. In Esthland she was sold as
a slave, quite parted from her boy, who also was sold, and again sold;
but did at last fall in with a kinsman high in the Russian service;
did from him find redemption and help, and so rose, in a distinguished
manner, to manhood, victorious self-help, and recovery of his kingdom
at last. He even met his mother again, he as King of Norway, she as
one wonderfully lifted out of darkness into new life, and happiness
still in store.

         [Footnote 10: Tryggve, one of the Norwegian sub-kings, slain
         by order of Gunhild, Queen of Norway.]

Grown to manhood, Tryggveson, now become acquainted with his birth,
and with his, alas! hopeless claims, left Russia for the one
profession open to him, that of sea-robbery; and did feats without
number in that questionable line in many seas and scenes,--in England
latterly, and most conspicuously of all. In one of his courses
thither, after long labors in the Hebrides, Man, Wales, and down the
western shores to the very Land's End and farther, he paused at the
Scilly Islands for a little while. He was told of a wonderful
Christian hermit living strangely in these sea-solitudes; had the
curiosity to seek him out, examine, question, and discourse with him;
and, after some reflection, accepted Christian baptism from the
venerable man. In Snorro the story is involved in miracle, rumor, and
fable; but the fact itself seems certain, and is very interesting; the
great, wild, noble soul of fierce Olaf opening to this wonderful
gospel of tidings from beyond the world, tidings which infinitely
transcended all else he had ever heard or dreamt of! It seems certain
he was baptized here; date not fixable; shortly before poor
heart-broken Dunstan's death, or shortly after; most English churches,
monasteries especially, lying burnt, under continual visitation of the
Danes. Olaf, such baptism notwithstanding, did not quit his viking
profession; indeed, what other was there for him in the world as yet?

We mentioned his occasional copartneries with Svein of the
Double-beard, now become King of Denmark, but the greatest of these,
and the alone interesting at this time, is their joint invasion of
England, and Tryggveson's exploits and fortunes there some years after
that adventure of baptism in the Scilly Isles. Svein and he "were
above a year in England together," this time: they steered up the
Thames with three hundred ships and many fighters; siege, or at least
furious assault, of London was their first or main enterprise, but it
did not succeed. The "Saxon Chronicle" gives date to it, A.D. 994, and
names expressly, as Svein's copartner, "Olaus, King of Norway,"--which
he was as yet far from being; but in regard to the Year of Grace the
"Saxon Chronicle" is to be held indisputable, and, indeed, has the
field to itself in this matter. But finding London impregnable for the
moment (no ship able to get athwart the bridge, and many Danes
perishing in the attempt to do it by swimming), Svein and Olaf turned
to other enterprises; all England in a manner lying open to them, turn
which way they liked. They burnt and plundered over Kent, over
Hampshire, Sussex; they stormed far and wide; world lying all before
them where to choose. Wretched Ethelred, as the one invention he could
fall upon, offered them Danegelt (£16,000 of silver this year, but it
rose in other years as high as £48,000); the desperate Ethelred, a
clear method of quenching fire by pouring _oil_ on it! Svein and Olaf
accepted; withdrew to Southampton--Olaf at least did--till the money
was got ready. Strange to think of, fierce Svein of the Double-beard,
and conquest of England by him; this had at last become the one
salutary result which remained for that distracted, down-trodden, now
utterly chaotic and anarchic country. A conquering Svein, followed by
an ably and earnestly administrative, as well as conquering, Knut
(whom Dahlmann compares to Charlemagne), were thus by the mysterious
destinies appointed the effective saviours of England.

[Illustration: A Norse raid under Olaf.]

Tryggveson, on this occasion, was a good while at Southampton; and
roamed extensively about, easily victorious over everything, if
resistance were attempted, but finding little or none; and acting now
in a peaceable or even friendly capacity. In the Southampton country
he came in contact with the then Bishop of Winchester, afterward
Archbishop of Canterbury, excellent Elphegus, still dimly decipherable
to us as a man of great natural discernment, piety, and inborn
veracity; a hero-soul, probably of real brotherhood with Olaf's own.
He even made court visits to King Ethelred; one visit to him at
Andover of a very serious nature. By Elphegus, as we can discover, he
was introduced into the real depths of the Christian faith. Elphegus,
with due solemnity of apparatus, in presence of the king, at Andover
baptized Olaf anew, and to him Olaf engaged that he would never
plunder in England any more; which promise, too, he kept. In fact, not
long after, Svein's conquest of England being in an evidently forward
state, Tryggveson (having made, withal, a great English or Irish
marriage,--a dowager princess, who had voluntarily fallen in love with
him,--see Snorro for this fine romantic fact!) mainly resided in our
island for two or three years, or else in Dublin, in the precincts of
the Danish Court there in the Sister Isle. Accordingly it was in
Dublin, as above noted, that Hakon's spy found him; and from the
Liffey that his squadron sailed, through the Hebrides, through the
Orkneys, plundering and baptizing in their strange way, toward such
success as we have seen.[11]

         [Footnote 11: Hakon, now King of Norway, sent a spy to learn
         if Olaf thought of regaining his inheritance. Guided by the
         spy, Olaf did sail with his fleet for Norway, found the
         people there in unexpected rebellion against Hakon's tyranny,
         set himself at their head, easily overthrew the king,
         executed him amid general rejoicing and established himself
         upon the throne.]

Tryggveson made a stout, and, in effect, victorious and glorious
struggle for himself as king. Daily and hourly vigilant to do so,
often enough by soft and even merry methods,--for he was a witty,
jocund man, and had a fine ringing laugh in him, and clear pregnant
words ever ready,--or if soft methods would not serve, then by hard,
and even hardest, he put down a great deal of miscellaneous anarchy in
Norway; was especially busy against heathenism (devil-worship and its
rites): this, indeed, may be called the focus and heart of all his
royal endeavor in Norway, and of all the troubles he now had with his
people there. For this was a serious, vital, all-comprehending matter:
devil-worship, a thing not to be tolerated one moment longer than you
could by any method help! Olaf's success was intermittent, of varying
complexion; but his effort, swift or slow, was strong and continual;
and on the whole he did succeed. Take a sample or two of that
wonderful conversion process:

At one of his first Things he found the Bonders all assembled in arms;
resolute to the death seemingly, against his proposal and him.
Tryggveson said little; waited impassive, "What your reasons are, good
men?" One zealous Bonder started up in passionate parliamentary
eloquence; but after a sentence or two broke down; one, and then
another, and still another, and remained all three staring in
open-mouthed silence there! The peasant-proprietors accepted the
phenomenon as ludicrous, perhaps partly as miraculous withal, and
consented to baptism this time.

On another occasion of a Thing, which had assembled near some heathen
temple to meet him,--temple where Hakon Jarl had done much repairing,
and set up many idol figures and sumptuous ornaments, regardless of
expense, especially a very big and splendid Thor, with massive gold
collar round the neck of him, not the like of it in Norway,--King
Tryggveson was clamorously invited by the Bonders to step in there,
enlighten his eyes, and partake of the sacred rites. Instead of which
he rushed into the temple with his armed men; smashed down, with his
own battle-axe, the god Thor prostrate on the floor at one stroke, to
set an example; and in a few minutes had the whole Hakon Pantheon
wrecked; packing up, meanwhile, all the gold and preciosities
accumulated there (not forgetting Thor's illustrious gold collar, of
which we shall hear again), and victoriously took the plunder home
with him for his own royal uses and behoof of the state.

By unwearied industry of this and better kinds, Tryggveson had
trampled down idolatry, so far as form went,--how far in substance may
be greatly doubted. But it is to be remembered withal, that always on
the back of these compulsory adventures there followed English
bishops, priests, and preachers; whereby to the open-minded,
conviction, to all degrees of it, was attainable, while silence and
passivity became the duty or necessity of the unconvinced party.

In about two years Norway was all gone over with a rough harrow of
conversion. Heathenism at least constrained to be silent and outwardly
conformable. Tryggveson next turned his attention to Iceland, sent one
Thangbrand, priest from Saxony, of wonderful qualities, military, as
well as theological, to try and convert Iceland. Thangbrand made a few
converts; for Olaf had already many estimable Iceland friends, whom he
liked much, and was much liked by; and conversion was the ready road
to his favor. Thangbrand, I find, lodged with Hall of Sida (familiar
acquaintance of "Burnt Njal," whose Saga has its admirers among us
even now). Thangbrand converted Hall and one or two other leading men;
but in general he was reckoned quarrelsome and blusterous rather than
eloquent and piously convincing. Two skalds of repute made biting
lampoons upon Thangbrand, whom Thangbrand, by two opportunities that
offered, cut down and did to death because of their skaldic quality.
Another he killed with his own hand, I know not for what reason. In
brief, after about a year, Thangbrand returned to Norway and King
Olaf, declaring the Icelanders to be a perverse, satirical, and
inconvertible people, having himself, the record says, been "the death
of three men there." King Olaf was in high rage at this result; but
was persuaded by the Icelanders about him to try farther, and by a
milder instrument. He accordingly chose one Thormod, a pious, patient,
and kindly man, who, within the next year or so, did actually
accomplish the matter; namely, get Christianity, by open vote,
declared at Thingvalla by the general Thing of Iceland there; the roar
of a volcanic eruption at the right moment rather helping the
conclusion, if I recollect. Whereupon Olaf's joy was no doubt great.

One general result of these successful operations was the discontent,
to all manner of degrees, on the part of many Norse individuals,
against this glorious and victorious, but peremptory and terrible king
of theirs. Tryggveson, I fancy, did not much regard all that; a man of
joyful, cheery temper, habitually contemptuous of danger. Another
trivial misfortune that befell in these conversion operations, and
became important to him, he did not even know of, and would have much
despised if he had. It was this: Sigrid, queen-dowager of Sweden,
thought to be among the most shining women of the world, was also
known for one of the most imperious, revengeful, and relentless, and
had got for herself the name of Sigrid the Proud. In her high
widowhood she had naturally many wooers; but treated them in a manner
unexampled.

In spite of which, however, there went from Tryggveson, who was now a
widower, some incipient marriage proposals to this proud widow; by
whom they were favorably received; as from the brightest man in all
the world, they might seem worth being. Now, in one of these
anti-heathen onslaughts of King Olaf's on the idol temples of
Hakon--(I think it was that case where Olaf's own battle-axe struck
down the monstrous refulgent Thor, and conquered an immense gold ring
from the neck of him, or from the door of his temple)--a huge gold
ring, at any rate, had come into Olaf's hands; and this he bethought
him might be a pretty present to Queen Sigrid, the now favorable,
though the proud. Sigrid received the ring with joy; fancied what a
collar it would make for her own fair neck; but noticed that her two
goldsmiths, weighing it on their fingers, exchanged a glance. "What is
that?" exclaimed Queen Sigrid. "Nothing," answered they, or endeavored
to answer, dreading mischief. But Sigrid compelled them to break open
the ring; and there was found, all along the inside of it, an occult
ring of copper, not a heart of gold at all! "Ha," said the proud
queen, flinging it away, "he that could deceive in this matter can
deceive in many others!" And was in hot wrath with Olaf; though, by
degrees, again she took milder thoughts.

Milder thoughts, we say; and consented to a meeting next autumn at
some half-way station, where their great business might be brought to
a happy settlement and betrothment. Both Olaf Tryggveson and the high
dowager appear to have been tolerably of willing mind at this meeting;
but Olaf interposed, what was always one condition with him, "Thou
must consent to baptism, and give up thy idol-gods." "They are the
gods of all my forefathers," answered the lady; "choose thou what gods
thou pleasest, but leave me mine." Whereupon an altercation; and
Tryggveson, as was his wont, towered up into shining wrath, and
exclaimed at last, "Why should I care about thee then, old faded
heathen creature?" And impatiently wagging his glove, hit her, or
slightly switched her, on the face with it, and contemptuously turning
away, walked out of the adventure. "This is a feat that may cost thee
dear one day," said Sigrid. And in the end it came to do so, little as
the magnificent Olaf deigned to think of it at the moment.

Olaf Tryggveson, though his kingdom was the smallest of the Norse
Three, had risen to a renown over all the Norse world which neither he
of Denmark nor he of Sweden could pretend to rival. A magnificent,
far-shining man; more expert in all "bodily exercises," as the Norse
called them, than any man had ever been before him, or after was.
Could keep five daggers in the air, always catching the proper fifth
by its handle, and sending it aloft again; could shoot supremely,
throw a javelin with either hand; and, in fact, in battle usually
threw two together. These, with swimming, climbing, leaping, were the
then admirable Fine Arts of the North; in all which Tryggveson appears
to have been the Raphael and the Michael Angelo at once. Essentially
definable, too, if we look well into him, as a wild bit of real
heroism, in such rude guise and environment; a high, true, and great
human soul. A jovial burst of laughter in him, too; a bright, airy,
wise way of speech; dressed beautifully and with care; a man admired
and loved exceedingly by those he liked; dreaded as death by those he
did not like. "Hardly any king," says Snorro, "was ever so well
obeyed, by one class out of zeal and love, by the rest out of dread."
His glorious course, however, was not to last long.

King Svein of the Double-beard had not yet completed his conquest of
England,--by no means yet, some thirteen horrid years of that still
before him!--when, over in Denmark, he found that complaints against
him and intricacies had arisen, on the part principally of one
Burislav, King of the Wends (far up the Baltic), and in a less degree
with the King of Sweden and other minor individuals. Svein earnestly
applied himself to settle these, and have his hands free. Burislav, an
aged heathen gentleman, proved reasonable and conciliatory; so, too,
the King of Sweden, and Dowager Queen Sigrid, his managing mother.
Bargain in both these cases got sealed and crowned by marriage. Svein,
who had become a widower lately, now wedded Sigrid; and might think,
possibly enough, he had got a proud bargain, though a heathen one.
Burislav also insisted on marriage with Princess Thyri, the
Double-beard's sister. Thyri, inexpressibly disinclined to wed an aged
heathen of that stamp, pleaded hard with her brother; but the
Double-bearded was inexorable; Thyri's wailings and entreaties went
for nothing. With some guardian foster-brother, and a serving-maid or
two, she had to go on this hated journey. Old Burislav, at sight of
her, blazed out into marriage feast of supreme magnificence, and was
charmed to see her, but Thyri would not join the marriage party,
refused to eat with it or sit with it at all. Day after day, for six
days, flatly refused; and after nightfall of the sixth, glided out
with her foster-brother into the woods, into by-paths and
inconceivable wanderings; and, in effect, got home to Denmark. Brother
Svein was not for the moment there; probably enough gone to England
again. But Thyri knew too well he would not allow her to stay here, or
anywhere that he could help, except with the old heathen she had just
fled from.

Thyri, looking round the world, saw no likely road for her, but to
Olaf Tryggveson in Norway; to beg protection from the most heroic man
she knew of in the world. Olaf, except by renown, was not known to
her; but by renown he well was. Olaf, at sight of her, promised
protection and asylum against all mortals. Nay, in discoursing with
Thyri Olaf perceived more and more clearly what a fine handsome being,
soul and body, Thyri was; and in a short space of time winded up by
proposing to Thyri, who, humbly, and we may fancy with what secret
joy, consented to say yes, and become Queen of Norway. In the due
months they had a little son, Harald; who, it is credibly recorded,
was the joy of both his parents; but who, to their inexpressible
sorrow, in about a year died, and vanished from them. This, and one
other fact now to be mentioned, is all the wedded history we have of
Thyri.

The other fact is, that Thyri had, by inheritance or covenant, not
depending on her marriage with old Burislav, considerable properties
in Wendland, which she often reflected might be not a little
behooveful to her here in Norway, where her civil-list was probably
but straitened. She spoke of this to her husband; but her husband
would take no hold, merely made her gifts, and said, "Pooh, pooh,
can't we live without old Burislav and his Wendland properties?" So
that the lady sank into ever deeper anxiety and eagerness about this
Wendland object; took to weeping; sat weeping whole days; and when
Olaf asked, "What ails thee, then?" would answer, or did answer once,
"What a different man my father Harald Gormson was" (vulgarly called
Blue-tooth), "compared with some that are now kings! For no King Svein
in the world would Harald Gormson have given up his own or his wife's
just rights!" Whereupon Tryggveson started up, exclaiming, in some
heat, "Of thy brother Svein I never was afraid; if Svein and I meet in
contest, it will not be Svein, I believe, that conquers;" and went off
in a towering fume. Consented, however, at last, had to consent, to
get his fine fleet equipped and armed, and decide to sail with it to
Wendland to have speech and settlement with King Burislav.

Tryggveson had already ships and navies that were the wonder of the
North. Especially in building war-ships--the Crane, the Serpent, last
of all the Long Serpent--he had, for size, for outward beauty, and
inward perfection of equipment, transcended all example.

This new sea expedition became an object of attention to all
neighbors; especially Queen Sigrid the Proud and Svein Forkbeard, her
now king, were attentive to it.

"This insolent Tryggveson," Queen Sigrid would often say, and had long
been saying, to her Svein, "to marry thy sister without leave had or
asked of thee; and now flaunting forth his war navies, as if he, king
only of paltry Norway, were the big hero of the North! Why do you
suffer it, you kings really great?"

By such persuasions, and reiterations, King Svein of Denmark, King
Olaf of Sweden, and Jarl Eric,[12] now a great man there, grown rich
by prosperous sea-robbery and other good management, were brought to
take the matter up, and combine strenuously for destruction of King
Olaf Tryggveson on this grand Wendland expedition of his. Fleets and
forces were with best diligence got ready; and, withal, a certain Jarl
Sigwald of Jomsburg, chieftain of the Jomsvikings, a powerful,
plausible, and cunning man, was appointed to find means of joining
himself to Tryggveson's grand voyage; of getting into Tryggveson's
confidence, and keeping Svein Forkbeard, Eric, and the Swedish king
aware of all his movements.

         [Footnote 12: Eric, son of King Hakon.]

King Olaf Tryggveson, unacquainted with all this, sailed away in
summer, with his splendid fleet; went through the Belts with
prosperous winds, under bright skies, to the admiration of both
shores. Such a fleet, with its shining Serpents, long and short, and
perfection of equipment and appearance, the Baltic never saw before.
Jarl Sigwald joined with new ships by the way. "Had," he too, "a visit
to King Burislav to pay; how could he ever do it in better company?"
and studiously and skilfully ingratiated himself with King Olaf. Old
Burislav, when they arrived, proved altogether courteous, handsome,
and amenable; agreed at once to Olaf's claims for his now queen, did
the rites of hospitality with a generous plenitude to Olaf; who
cheerily renewed acquaintance with that country, known to him in early
days (the cradle of his fortunes in the viking line), and found old
friends there still surviving, joyful to meet him again. Jarl Sigwald
encouraged these delays, King Svein & Co. not being yet quite ready.
"Get ready!" Sigwald directed them, and they diligently did. Olaf's
men their business now done, were impatient to be home, and grudged
every day of loitering there; but, till Sigwald pleased, such his
power of flattering and cajoling Tryggveson, they could not get away.

At length, Sigwald's secret messengers reporting all ready on the part
of Svein & Co., Olaf took farewell of Burislav and Wendland, and all
gladly sailed away. Svein, Eric, and the Swedish king, with their
combined fleets, lay in wait behind some cape in a safe little bay of
some island, then called Svolde, but not in our time to be found: the
Baltic tumults in the fourteenth century having swallowed it, as some
think, and leaving us uncertain whether it was in the neighborhood of
Rugen Island or in the Sound of Elsinore. There lay Svein, Eric & Co.
waiting till Tryggveson and his fleet came up, Sigwald's spy
messengers daily reporting what progress he and it had made. At
length, one bright summer morning, the fleet made appearance, sailing
in loose order, Sigwald, as one acquainted with the shoal places,
steering ahead, and showing them the way.

Snorro rises into one of his pictorial fits, seized with enthusiasm at
the thought of such a fleet, and reports to us largely in what order
Tryggveson's winged Coursers of the Deep, in long series, for perhaps
an hour or more, came on, and what the three potentates, from their
knoll of vantage, said of each as it hove in sight. Svein thrice over
guessed this and the other noble vessel to be the Long Serpent; Eric
always correcting him: "No, that is not the Long Serpent yet" (and
aside always), "Nor shall you be lord of it, King, when it does come."
The Long Serpent itself did make appearance. Eric, Svein, and the
Swedish king hurried on board, and pushed out of their hiding-place
into the open sea. Treacherous Sigwald, at the beginning of all this,
had suddenly doubled that cape of theirs, and struck into the bay out
of sight, leaving the foremost Tryggveson ships astonished, and
uncertain what to do, if it were not simply to strike sail and wait
till Olaf himself with the Long Serpent arrived.

Olaf's chief captains, seeing the enemy's huge fleet come out, and how
the matter lay, strongly advised King Olaf to elude this stroke of
treachery, and, with all sail, hold on his course, fight being now on
so unequal terms. Snorro says, the king, high on the quarter-deck
where he stood, replied, "Strike the sails! never shall men of mine
think of flight. I never fled from battle. Let God dispose of my
life; but flight I will never take." And so the battle arrangements
immediately began, and the battle with all fury went loose, and lasted
hour after hour, till almost sunset, if I well recollect. "Olaf stood
on the Serpent's quarter-deck," says Snorro, "high over the others. He
had a gilt shield and a helmet inlaid with gold; over his armor he had
a short red coat, and was easily distinguished from other men."
Snorro's account of the battle is altogether animated, graphic, and so
minute that antiquaries gather from it, if so disposed (which we but
little are), what the methods of Norse sea-fighting were; their
shooting of arrows, casting of javelins, pitching of big stones,
ultimately boarding, and mutual clashing and smashing, which it would
not avail us to speak of here. Olaf stood conspicuous all day,
throwing javelins, of deadly aim, with both hands at once;
encouraging, fighting, and commanding like a highest sea-king.

The Danish fleet, the Swedish fleet, were, both of them, quickly dealt
with, and successively withdrew out of shot-range. And then Jarl Eric
came up, and fiercely grappled with the Long Serpent, or, rather, with
her surrounding comrades; and gradually, as they were beaten empty of
men, with the Long Serpent herself. The fight grew ever fiercer, more
furious. Eric was supplied with new men from the Swedes and Danes;
Olaf had no such resource, except from the crews of his own beaten
ships; and at length this also failed him; all his ships, except the
Long Serpent, being beaten and emptied. Olaf fought on unyielding.
Eric twice boarded him, was twice repulsed. Olaf kept his
quarter-deck; unconquerable, though left now more and more hopeless,
fatally short of help. A tall young man, called Einar Tamberskelver,
very celebrated and important afterward in Norway, and already the
best archer known, kept busy with his bow. Twice he nearly shot Jarl
Eric in his ship. "Shoot me that man," said Jarl Eric to a bowman near
him; and, just as Tamberskelver was drawing his bow the third time, an
arrow hit it in the middle and broke it in two. "What is this that has
broken?" asked King Olaf. "Norway from thy hand, King," answered
Tamberskelver. Tryggveson's men, he observed with surprise, were
striking violently on Eric's; but to no purpose; nobody fell. "How is
this?" asked Tryggveson. "Our swords are notched and blunted, King;
they do not cut." Olaf stept down to his arm-chest; delivered out new
swords; and it was observed as he did it, blood ran trickling from his
wrist; but none knew where the wound was. Eric boarded a third time.
Olaf, left with hardly more than one man, sprang overboard (one sees
that red coat of his still glancing in the evening sun), and sank in
the deep waters to his long rest.

Rumor ran among his people that he still was not dead; grounding on
some movement by the ships of that traitorous Sigwald, they fancied
Olaf had dived beneath the keels of his enemies, and got away with
Sigwald, as Sigwald himself evidently did. "Much was hoped, supposed,
spoken," says one old mourning Skald; "but the truth was, Olaf
Tryggveson was never seen in Norseland more." Strangely he remains
still a shining figure to us; the wildly beautifullest man, in body
and in soul, that one has ever heard of in the North.




WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR

By G. W. PROTHERO

(1027-1087)

[Illustration: William the Conqueror.]


William I., King of England, surnamed the Conqueror, was born in 1027
or 1028. He was the son of Robert, Duke of Normandy and Herleva,
daughter of Fulbert, a tanner of Falaise. When he was about seven
years old his father, intending to go on pilgrimage and having no
legitimate sons, proposed him as his heir. The great men of the duchy
did homage to the child, and a year later (1035) his father's death
left him to make good his claim. Anarchy was the natural result of a
minority. William's life was on more than one occasion in danger, and
several of his guardians perished in his service. At the earliest
possible age he received knighthood from the hands of Henry I. of
France, and speedily began to show signs of his capacity for
government.

In 1042 he insisted that the "truce of God" should be proclaimed and
observed in Normandy. When he was about twenty years old his authority
was threatened by a general conspiracy, which spread through the
western half of his duchy. An attempt was made to seize him at
Valognes, and he only escaped by riding hard all night to his own
castle at Falaise. Bessin and Cotentin, the most Norman parts of
Normandy, rose in rebellion. William sought and obtained aid from King
Henry, and completely defeated the rebels at Val-es-Dunes near Caen
(1047). The battle was but a combat of horse, but it decided the fate
of the war and left William master of his duchy. The debt which he
owed to Henry was repaid next year. War broke out between Geoffrey,
Count of Anjou, and Henry (1048), and William came to his suzerain's
assistance. Alençon, one of the chief border fortresses between
Normandy and Maine, which had received an Angevin garrison, was
captured by the duke. The inhabitants had taunted him with his birth,
and William, who had dealt leniently with the rebels after
Val-es-Dunes, took a cruel revenge. Soon afterward Domfront, another
important border fortress, fell into his hands.

In 1051 William visited England. Two years later he married Matilda,
daughter of Baldwin, Earl of Flanders, and a descendant of Alfred. The
marriage had been forbidden by a council at Rheims as uncanonical, and
was opposed by Lanfranc, Prior of Bec. This produced a quarrel between
Lanfranc and William, who ravaged the lands of the abbey and ordered
the banishment of its prior. Lanfranc, however, soon came to terms
with the duke, and engaged to obtain a dispensation from Rome, which,
however, was not granted till 1059.

Strengthened by this alliance with Flanders, William showed himself
more than a match for all his enemies. Henry, who had hitherto been
for the most part friendly, now turned against him. After the
suppression of some isolated revolts, William was threatened in 1054
by a great confederacy. His dominions were invaded by the forces of
the French king, in combination with those of Geoffrey of Anjou,
Theobald of Blois, and others. William remained at first on the
defensive; then, falling suddenly on one of the French armies at
Mortemer, in the north-eastern corner of his duchy, he cut it to
pieces. This blow put an end to the war; Henry made peace (1055), and
William took the opportunity of extending his dominions in a southerly
direction. He built fresh fortresses and exacted homage from Count
Geoffrey of Mayenne.

In 1058 Henry and Count Geoffrey made a final effort to crush their
dangerous neighbor; but the effort failed, like those which preceded
it. William again allowed the allies to enter and ravage his
territory; but, while the French army was crossing the Dive at
Varaville, he attacked and completely destroyed their rear-guard,
which was cut off from the van by the advancing tide. Henry again made
peace, and soon afterward died (1060). The death of Geoffrey of Anjou
in the same year relieved William of his most formidable rival for the
possession of Maine. Herbert Wake-Dog, the lawful ruler of that
territory, who had been dispossessed by Geoffrey, recovered his
dominions on the latter's death. He at once "commended" himself to
William, thus making the duke his heir. On his death in 1063, William
took possession of Le Mans and the county of which it was the
capital--an acquisition which extended his southern frontier nearly to
the Loire, almost severed Brittany from the rest of France, and paved
the way for the subsequent junction with Anjou.

It was apparently soon after this event, in the year 1064, that
Harold, then Earl of Wessex, visited Normandy, and, according to
legend, was entrapped into an oath to support William as heir to the
English throne. When Harold was elected and crowned King of England
(1066), William's first step was to send an embassy to him demanding
the fulfilment of his promise. The purport of the demand is as
uncertain as that of the pledge; but, whatever it was, Harold rejected
it. The duke thereupon summoned a council of his supporters, who
advised him to call together an assembly representing the whole duchy.
This assembly, a typical feudal parliament, met at Lillebonne. While
acting together it appears to have opposed the scheme for the conquest
of England which William laid before it, but its members were won over
singly. He then made a compact with Tostig, the banished brother of
Harold; he came to terms with the Emperor Henry; he conciliated
Philip, King of France, by offering to hold England as his vassal;
and--most important of all--he obtained the sanction of Rome.

Pope Alexander II., not only issued a bull declaring William to be the
rightful heir to the throne, but sent him a ring and a banner as
symbols that the blessing of heaven was on his claim. Embarking at St.
Valéry, William landed, on 28th of September, at Pevensey. The battle
of Senlac or Hastings (October 14, 1066), was a decisive victory for
the Duke of Normandy; but it took five years more to complete the
conquest of England.

Early in 1067 William made a progress through the eastern and central
parts of his new dominions. All that had as yet submitted to him was
comprised in the old kingdoms of Wessex and East Anglia, and a small
portion of Mercia. He at once secured his hold over these districts by
the erection of fortresses in London, Norwich, and elsewhere. He
received homage from the great men; he confiscated the lands of those
who had resisted him; and, while keeping a large number of manors for
himself, he granted others to his followers. Even those who had not
resisted were regarded as having legally forfeited their title and had
to submit to a re-grant on less advantageous terms. In March, 1067,
William returned to Normandy, taking with him as hostages the Earls
Eadwine, Morkere, and Waltheof.

The revolts which broke out in the north and southwest compelled him
to return to England in December. Early in 1068 he marched on Exeter,
as the centre of the western revolt. He took the town and built a
castle, after which he subdued Cornwall, and then marching northward
forced Bristol to submit. In the summer of 1068 there was a general
rising of the North, of which Eadgar was the nominal head; but Eadwine
and Morkere were the moving spirits. The insurgents were aided by
Malcolm, King of Scotland. William had, however, only to show himself
in order to put down the insurrection. He journeyed northward, by way
of Warwick and Nottingham, to York, received the submission of
Eadwine, Morkere, and Malcolm, and returned by way of Lincoln and
Cambridge. His march was accompanied by heavy confiscations, and great
castles, rising in places of vantage, rendered the Norman power at
once visible and secure.

In the spring of 1069 a fresh revolt broke out. Robert of Comines, the
newly appointed Earl of Northumberland, was slain at Durham; a Danish
fleet entered the Humber, and a Danish army, joined by Eadgar and
Waltheof, seized and burned York. The sons of Harold attacked Devon,
while other isolated outbreaks took place in the west. These were
speedily put down by William's lieutenants; and in the autumn the king
himself, going northward a second time, recovered York, and harried
Northumberland with ruthless deliberation. Returning to keep Christmas
at York, he set out again in January, 1070, to oppose Malcolm, who had
crossed the border in aid of the insurgents. He forced Waltheof to
submit, and drove the Scottish king back into his own country; then,
marching over pathless fells in the depth of winter, he reached
Chester, took the town, and founded another castle.

[Illustration: William at Hastings.]

Northumbria, exhausted and ruined, gave up the struggle, and the
omission of the northern counties from the Domesday survey throws a
grim light on the completeness of the Conquest. In one district only,
the fens of Cambridgeshire, where Hereward still held out, the spirit
of resistance survived. In April, 1071, William arrived at Cambridge
and commenced a regular blockade. Advancing cautiously by means of a
causeway through the fens, he entered Ely in October, and therewith
the last flicker of independence died out. The conquest of England was
completed. To guard against any fresh incitements to rebellion from
Scotland, William in 1072 invaded that country and forced Malcolm to
do him homage--an event which had an important effect on the
subsequent relations of the two countries.

Henceforward such trouble as William met with came, not from the
English, but from his Norman vassals or his own family. In 1073 the
citizens of Le Mans took advantage of his absence to set up a
"commune," and invited Fulk of Anjou to protect them. William was soon
in the field, this time assisted by English troops. He harried the
country, recovered Le Mans, and made an advantageous peace with the
count. By a skilful compromise he recognized Fulk as overlord of
Maine, but kept actual possession of the district, for which his son
Robert did homage. A year later a formidable revolt broke out in
England. Two of William's great vassals, Ralph, Earl of Norfolk, and
Roger, Earl of Hereford, rebelled, and a Danish fleet, probably in
alliance with them, appeared in the Humber. William returned at once
to England and put down the insurrection. A great meeting of the witan
was summoned to try Roger and Waltheof, for the latter, though he took
no part in the rebellion, had undoubtedly been privy to it. Roger was
imprisoned for life and Waltheof was condemned to death.

This was the last instance of opposition to William in England; but
the remaining ten years of his life were occupied with almost
continuous troubles on the Continent. In 1076 he was engaged in a war
with Brittany, which the interference of Philip of France forced him
to bring to an unsuccessful conclusion. Next year he quarrelled with
his son Robert. Matilda took the young man's side against her husband,
and Philip lent him his assistance. In 1080 William was at open war
with his son. While besieging him at Gerberoi he received a wound and
was forced to raise the siege. A temporary reconciliation followed,
soon to give way to another and a final quarrel. Three years later
Matilda died, and troubles thickened upon William. A rebellious
vassal, Hubert of Beaumont, seems to have held him at bay for nearly
three years. Rival claims to Vexin, a district on the eastern frontier
of Normandy, involved him in another war with France. He was growing
old and weary, and, as he lay sick at Rouen in the summer of 1087, the
French army harried his territories with impunity. When he had
recovered sufficiently to take the field, he invaded Vexin and burned
the town of Mantes. But his horse, plunging in the burning cinders,
inflicted on him an internal injury, which proved his death-wound He
was carried to St. Gervais, where, on September 9, 1087, he died. His
body was conveyed to Caen and buried in the great minster which he had
built.

The career of William as a warrior and conqueror occupies of necessity
the largest space in his life; but his fame as a statesman and
administrator is not less than that which he won on the battle-field.
This is not the place to discuss the results of the Conquest, but the
policy of the Conqueror in regard to Church and State cannot be
overlooked. An orthodox churchman, a supporter of union under the
successor of Peter against the schismatic tendencies of the English
Church, he nevertheless repelled any claim on the part of Rome to
interference with his political sovereignty. He allowed Peter's pence
to be collected, but refused to pay tribute to the Pope. While
recognizing him as head of the Church, he declined to hold his kingdom
as his vassal, nor would he permit papal bulls to enter England or
excommunications to be issued against any of his subjects without his
leave. He controlled all appointments to important ecclesiastical
dignities; he made laws for the Church; he dealt justice to
ecclesiastics, high and low, in his own courts. At the same time he
had no desire to humiliate the Church; on the contrary, he sought to
elevate it to a higher position in the State, to make it a more potent
agent of civilization. A weaker statesman might have seen his own
advantage in encouraging the rivalry between Canterbury and York;
William strengthened the Church by forcing the younger to give way to
the elder see. With the same object, that of increasing the efficiency
of ecclesiastical organization, he severed the temporal and spiritual
jurisdictions and furthered the enforcement of clerical celibacy.
Finally, the trust which he reposed in Lanfranc from the time of his
appointment to the see of Canterbury in 1070 shows not only his
insight into character but his respect for the head of the English
Church.

In regard to temporal affairs William was rather an administrator than
a lawgiver. His reign is not marked by a series of legislative acts
like those of Henry II. or Edward I.; but his work was the
indispensable preliminary to theirs, for a strong monarchy was the
first requisite of the state. To establish the power of the crown was
William's principal care. The disintegrating tendencies of feudalism
had already been visible under the Anglo-Saxon kings. William, while
he established fully developed feudalism as a social, territorial, and
military system in his new dominions, took measures to prevent it from
undermining his own authority. He scattered the estates of his great
vassals, so as to hinder them from building up provincial
principalities; he maintained the higher popular courts against the
encroachments of manorial jurisdictions; he prevented the claims of
feudal lordship from standing between himself and the mass of his
subjects, by exacting an oath from every landholder at the meeting of
Salisbury plain; finally, by the great survey which resulted in
"Domesday Book" he not only asserted his right to make a general
inquisition into property, but laid the firm basis of knowledge which
was indispensable to centralized government and taxation.

The care which he took to maintain English laws and institutions is
part of the same policy. He balanced the two nationalities over which
he ruled, and obliged each to depend upon him as its leader or
protector against the other. He ruled as an English king; his feudal
council was the witenagemot with a new qualification; but at the same
time he was lord of the land as no king had been before him, and he
enjoyed not only all the income of his predecessors but in addition
all the dues which came to him as feudal sovereign. He was thus
perhaps the strongest and most absolute monarch that has ever sat upon
the English throne.

In character William was stern, self-reliant, and imperious in a high
degree. He was not naturally cruel; but he was ruthless if it served
his purpose, and could take pitiless vengeance for an insult or a
wrong. He was too strong to prefer deceit when force would serve as
well, but his diplomacy was subtle and guileful, and no scruple turned
him aside from his aim. His temper, originally forgiving, was soured
by opposition toward the end of his life, and his tyrannical
tendencies were strengthened by the long exercise of uncontrolled
power. His passionate devotion to the chase is only too clearly shown
in the harshness of his forest laws. In private life he displayed
domestic virtues, and his fidelity to his wife was exceptional in the
annals of his house and time.




GODFREY DE BOUILLON

By HENRY G. HEWLETT

(1060-1100)

[Illustration: Crusaders. [TN]]


In the year 1094 the Turks besieged the Holy City of Jerusalem, then
ruled by the Fatimite caliphs, and took it. Pilgrims were then
subjected to every form of violence and insult. The Greek emperor
Alexius Comnenus, whom the Turks had recently defeated, implored the
assistance of the great Christian states against this new and
formidable foe. Pope Urban, to whom the letter was addressed, summoned
a council of nobles and prelates in Auvergne and, with solemn and
weighty words, appealed to the princes and soldiers of France who were
seated before him. He reminded them of the national exploits of their
fathers, whom Charles Martel and Charlemagne led against the Saracens,
and called on the sons of such fathers to achieve yet greater deeds.
As the burning words dropped from his lips they lighted a flame in
every heart, and the whole assembly suddenly rose, and shouted with
one voice, "It is God's will! It is God's will!" Urban caught up the
cry: "Yes, without doubt, it is God's will. He has dictated to you
the words, let them be your war-cry, and be this your badge!" As he
spoke he held up a crucifix. The great meeting was moved like one man;
and, falling on their knees, all confessed their sins, received
absolution, and took vows of service in the Holy War. A red cross,
embroidered on the right shoulder, was the common sign assumed by all
the soldiers, who thence acquired the name of "Crusaders." Estates
were pawned and sold to obtain money for the expenses of the
undertaking, and many commercial cities purchased important liberties
from their lords at this favorable opportunity. The chief of one of
three great divisions into which the Christian army was formed was a
man whom we have taken as the very type and model of a true
Crusader,--Godfrey de Bouillon.

[Illustration: Godfrey de Bouillon. [TN]]

He was the son of Gustavus, Count of Bouillon, or Boulogne, in the
district of Ardennes and province of Luxembourg, and was born about
the year 1060. His profession had been from his youth that of arms,
and his earliest services in the field were rendered to his lord, the
Emperor of Germany. In the war of Investiture he had taken an active
part against Gregory VII., and bore the Imperial standard at the
battle of Merseberg. By his hand the usurper, Rudolph, Duke of Suabia,
fell in that decisive encounter. Godfrey's sword, swayed by his young
and powerful wrist, is said to have shorn off the right arm of Rudolph
at a single stroke. For this valiant deed, Henry IV. created Godfrey
Duke of his province of Bouillon; or, according to some historians,
Lower Lorraine. At the subsequent siege of Rome, Godfrey made himself
again prominent by scaling the city walls among the first. This action
colored his whole life. All his contemporaries portray his nature as
displaying the loftiest integrity and deepest piety. Sound and clear
as his intellect was, he yet shared in the superstition of his times,
and was led by reflection to believe that, in bearing arms against
God's vicegerent, and attacking a city where so many apostles and
martyrs lay buried, he had been guilty of a heinous sin. Remorse
worked on his mind so heavily that he took a vow to join in the
Crusade, from a conviction that his glaring crime could only be
blotted out by a heroism equally conspicuous. His noble birth, and yet
nobler character, won for him so high a place in the estimation of his
fellows, that, on announcing his intention of undertaking the Crusade,
hundreds flocked to his standard. A worthy general, truly, of soldiers
thus ardent in a cause which they deemed divine! To the qualities of
bodily strength and beauty, which in those days were chiefly valued in
the head of an army, Godfrey happily united the more durable strength
of intellect and beauty of soul. His knightly heart and statesman's
mind never ran counter, and whatever generous policy the one dictated,
was carried into effect by the wisdom of the other. Although averse to
distinction, it was thrust upon him by the votes of his fellow-chiefs,
and their decision was gladly hailed by the common soldiers, who loved
Godfrey as a father. He would not, therefore, refuse the post of
general, but applied himself to its duties with activity. He first set
an example of unselfish zeal to his brother nobles, by disposing of
his duchy for the purpose of his expedition,--an example faithfully
followed by the leading nobility of France and the Rhine. He then
summoned his army to join him in August, 1096, on the banks of the
rivers Meuse and Moselle. At the appointed time, a force of 80,000
foot and 10,000 horse assembled under his banner, and set out on its
march through Germany,--the two other divisions of the Christian army
taking a different route. On reaching Hungary, Carloman, who then
ruled that country, showed some signs of objection to the passage of
so formidable a body,--remembering the licentious excesses that had
been committed by the rabble which followed Peter the Hermit. Here
Godfrey's wisdom was admirably displayed. By his firm measures of
restraint on the impetuosity of his troops he first proved that they
were under the influence of strict discipline. Then, confiding himself
to the justice and good faith of Carloman, he disarmed that monarch's
suspicions by frankness and simplicity. The result was that, instead
of opposition, the Hungarian prince gave him help, and escorted the
Crusaders with a body of cavalry into the territories of Greece.
Alexius Comnenus was by this time alarmed at the eagerness with which
the Christian states had responded to his appeal for aid against the
infidel. He mistrusted, not without reason, the intentions of some of
the chiefs of the expedition,--mere adventurers, like the Norman
Bohemond of Tarentum for example, who was his avowed foe,--and
therefore deemed it politic to guard against danger to himself by
demanding homage from all the Crusaders who entered his dominions. The
two other divisions of the Christian army were now on their way to
Constantinople, by a different road from that taken by Godfrey. One of
the French nobles, the Count de Vermandois, was shipwrecked on the
coast of Epirus, and Alexius unjustifiably detained him as a prisoner
or hostage for the good faith of the other leaders. On learning these
tidings, Godfrey, who was now in Thrace, sent to the emperor,
requiring the count's release. This was not accorded, and Godfrey
therefore treated the country as hostile, levying contributions on the
people as he marched through. The emperor immediately saw his error,
and promised to grant the count's release on the arrival of the French
army. This promise satisfied Godfrey, and his march was once more
peaceful. The wily emperor, in the meanwhile, obtained from his
prisoner an oath of homage, hoping to induce the other Crusaders to
follow the example. Godfrey, on his arrival, at first refused this,
as unbecoming the rank and character which he bore; but, finding that
the act would appease the jealousies which had already broken out
between the Greeks and Franks, and put a check on the schemes of those
leaders in the crusading ranks whom Alexius especially dreaded, he at
last consented. The other chieftains made a like submission; and this
sacrifice of pride, by healing internal discords, served for a season
to promote the success of the Crusade.

After a sojourn of some time at Constantinople, the Crusaders, now
formed into one army, crossed the Bosphorus, and entered Bithynia.
Here the sight of the carnage which the Turks had inflicted on the
weak and disorderly body that Peter had led forth, stimulated the zeal
and indignation of the Christian host. Its passage through the Turkish
kingdom of Roum was not unresisted. David, then Sultan, a valiant
prince, had already prepared an army, and fortified his capital of
Nice,--a position of great natural strength.

The Crusaders advanced in excellent order, and, after twice routing
the Turkish army of defence, commenced the siege. Godfrey is said to
have distinguished himself by a feat of skill on one occasion during
this assault. A gigantic Turk, who was the hero of the Moslem army,
had greatly harassed the Christians by his wondrous success in the use
of the javelin. Having spent his shafts one day, he ascended a tower,
and showered masses of rock on the besiegers, whom he at the same time
abused and defied to combat. The Christian archers played upon his
person, without bringing him down; until Godfrey grasped a cross-bow,
and at one shot pierced the giant's heart. The siege lasted seven
weeks; and was prosecuted with such vigor and ingenuity by the
Crusaders that the Turks were on the point of yielding, when Alexius,
who had sent a body of Greeks with the army, craftily procured to
himself the glory of conquest by instructing his general to intrigue
with the enemy secretly, and persuade them to yield to his power, on
condition of protection. The Greek general so worked upon the fears
and hopes of the garrison, that his advice was accepted; and, to the
surprise and anger of the Franks, the emperor's flag one day appeared
on the towers of Nice, and the city surrendered. This act of perfidy
reopened the jealousy between the Eastern and Western Christians,
which Godfrey had labored to extinguish; and from this time may be
dated the rise of those internal divisions which eventually proved so
fatal to the Crusaders.

Leaving Nice, the Crusaders advanced in two divisions, both without
guides, and through a hostile and desert country. The Turks, in great
numbers, followed in their rear. Godfrey and the Count of Toulouse
headed one division; Bohemond, Prince of Tarentum, and Robert, Duke of
Normandy (son of William the Conqueror), the other. The latter body
had separated from the former at some distance, and was traversing the
plains near Dorylæum, in Phrygia, when a sudden attack was made upon
it by a powerful army of Turks. The Christians were taken by surprise,
while exhausted with heat and fatigue, and in an unfavorable
situation. In spite of the heroic valor of Bohemond, Robert, and other
knights, the battle was turning against them, when Godfrey's division,
to which a message had been despatched, came up. He shouted aloud the
Crusaders' war-cry: "It is God's will!" and the whole army, echoing
the shout, by a gallant charge retrieved the fortunes of the day and
completely routed the Turks. After this success the Crusaders resolved
to march in a single body, and thus prevent a recurrence of the hazard
which they had escaped. The Turks preceded them, burning the crops as
they went, and the Christians, in consequence, suffered fearful
privations from famine during the march. Hundreds perished from
exhaustion. The horses died for want of sufficient food and water; and
knights were seen either walking on foot, or riding on oxen and asses,
carrying their own armor. In passing through Pisidia, an anecdote is
related of Godfrey which is characteristic of his courage and
gallantry. He was wandering among the recesses of a forest in pursuit
of game, which was needed for the supply of the troops, when he came
upon a private soldier of the army, who was defending himself from the
attack of a bear. Godfrey struck at the beast, which at once turned on
its new assailant, inflicting a deep wound in his thigh. Another
stroke from the skilful hunter's arm terminated the contest; but the
blood streamed from his wound so rapidly, that he scarcely reached the
camp alive. The grief of his soldiers was intense, as they beheld
their beloved leader stretched on a litter, and borne into his tent as
if dead. The skill of his physicians and a long interval of rest
triumphed over the weakness occasioned by the loss of blood, and
Godfrey once more appeared at the head of his army.

Antiochetta, the capital of Pisidia, attempted no resistance; and here
the main body of the Christians recruited for some time. Meanwhile, a
party of Crusaders, headed by Baldwin, brother of Godfrey, and a
famous knight named Tancred, had been sent forward to clear a passage
for the army. Tancred subdued the city of Tarsus; but his victory was
usurped by Baldwin, whose ambitions and covetous nature bore no
resemblance to that of his brother. Tancred, a man after Godfrey's
heart, surrendered this conquest for the sake of peace; but, when
Baldwin showed symptoms of repeating his injustice, resisted by force.
Tancred was defeated, but a reconciliation took place between the
combatants. Baldwin, who had no real interest in the success of the
Crusade, soon afterwards turned aside into Mesopotamia, where he made
himself master of Edessa, and formed a Christian state there. Though
founded by merely personal ambition, this eventually proved of great
assistance to the Crusaders, by checking the progress of the Turkish
arms in Asia.

The main body now crossed the Taurus, after a tedious and painful
passage, and presented itself before the walls of Antioch, then ruled
by an independent Turkish emir named Accien. This city was especially
dear to the Christians, as the first in which their title had been
assumed; and the sight of its walls roused their flagging spirits.
Some of the generals advised that the siege should be deferred for
some months, until reinforcements arrived, and the winter was over;
but the majority of the chiefs, among whom Godfrey was conspicuous,
confident of success, and dreading the depressing influences of delay,
urged an immediate attack, which was accordingly made. The Turks
adopted the stratagem of apparently neglecting to defend the city; and
the Christians, falling into the snare, scattered their forces. The
licentiousness of some of their number, moreover, proved fatal to
their vigilance, and a sudden sortie of the garrison inflicted deadly
havoc. The siege was then commenced in earnest; but the city was so
strongly guarded, that months elapsed without any impression being
made upon its walls; and disease, famine, and the inclemency of the
season, united with the missiles of the Turks to weaken the Christian
force. Many of the leaders (Robert, Duke of Normandy, among them),
withdrew in cowardly disgust at the failure of the siege and the
pressure of want; while despair drove many of those who remained to
courses of reckless vice. Godfrey, firm to his duty and strong in
faith, aided the exertions of the clergy in encouraging the spirits of
his troops, and restraining their profligate excesses. A timely supply
of provisions from some of the Armenian monasteries, and a brilliant
victory obtained by Bohemond and the Count of Toulouse over an army
which the Sultans of Aleppo and Damascus had sent to the succor of
Antioch, rewarded Godfrey's confidence and infused new vigor into the
hearts of his army. This was needed to sustain the brunt of a
desperate encounter which shortly afterward took place between the
besieged and their besiegers. A reinforcement of Italian Crusaders
having arrived, it was suddenly attacked by a large Turkish force, and
thrown into disorder. Godfrey, who had been engaged on the siege,
rapidly marshalled his men, and fell upon the enemy. A sortie of the
garrison was immediately made, and a fearful conflict ensued under the
walls of the city. The Turks were put to flight with immense loss, and
the Christians pursued them up to the very gates. In this scene of
carnage, Godfrey's recorded feats of valor approached the incredible.
His sword clave the stoutest armor asunder at a blow. A gigantic Arab
horseman offered him single combat, and broke his shield by way of
challenge. Godfrey rose in his stirrups, and smote the Arab on the
shoulder with such tremendous force as to split his whole body in
twain; half of which, with the head, fell into the river Orontes,
while the remainder, yet clinging to the terrified horse, was carried
back into the city.

Notwithstanding all these exploits, the Turks held out, and were only
defeated at last by stratagem. This was achieved by the skill of
Bohemond, who intrigued with Phirous, one of the leaders of the
garrison, for the surrender of the city, upon favorable terms to
himself. Bohemond stipulated with his fellow-chiefs that the
principality of Antioch should be granted him in return for his
services; and, after some opposition, this was conceded. Phirous
managed the perilous task of admitting the Crusaders with the utmost
adroitness. At the dead of night the walls were scaled by Bohemond and
his followers, and Antioch was taken, in June, 1098, after a siege of
eight months. Accien, its prince, and 6,000 Turks, are said to have
fallen on this eventful night.

The Crusaders had no sooner obtained this signal success than they
were in their turn besieged by an army raised by the Sultans of
Mossoul and other cities. Antioch had just sustained so long a siege,
that the Christians found scarcely any provisions on their entrance,
and their besiegers now cut off all supplies from without. Famine soon
raged in the city to such an extent, that horses, roots, leaves,
leathern shoes, and even human bodies, were eagerly devoured by the
starving soldiers. Godfrey shared his scanty meals with his comrades,
and is related to have slain his last charger for food. Desertion from
the ranks now occurred in great numbers, and despair led many to
blaspheme who were ashamed to fly. To add to the misery of the
Christians, they learned that the Emperor Alexius, who was advancing
with reinforcements, had judged their case hopeless, and retraced his
steps. The city was now scarcely defended, and many proposed to
surrender it, even on degrading terms, so that their lives were
spared.

Godfrey and the clergy again exerted themselves successfully. They
ventured to challenge the Turkish army to a combat of picked troops;
and when the proposal was spurned, boldly advanced to attack the whole
force. The appearance of the Crusaders, as they marched out of the
city, must have been indeed pitiable. Privations had so reduced them,
that many had no clothing. Some were nearly fainting from weakness.
The barons and knights proceeded chiefly on foot, and camels and asses
supplied the place of horses to most of those who rode. Yet the
burning zeal of the Christians made the march seem like a triumphal
procession; and while the clergy sang hymns of consolation and
victory, the soldiers responded with the war-cry, "It is God's will!
It is God's will!" The Turkish general, fearing nothing from an army
so scantily provided with the means of war, was taken by surprise, but
hastily arranged his troops in order of battle. The sight of several
natural prodigies, such as the sudden appearance of a meteor, and the
favorable direction of the wind, acting upon the superstitious fancy
of the Christians, impelled them to extraordinary exertions. The
Moslem forces, on the other hand, were weakened by the existence of
rivalries and discords in their midst, and lacked the stimulus which
the Christians derived from desperation. The attack was commenced by a
volley of arrows, followed by a charge of the Turkish and Arabian
archers, which the Crusaders not only steadily sustained, but
vigorously returned. Godfrey, who commanded their right wing, broke
the left wing of the Moslem; but the latter had encompassed the river
with a large force, and attacked the Christians in the rear. In spite
of the heroism of Godfrey and Tancred, who slaughtered all that
ventured to compete with them, and the brave resistance of the whole
army, the enemy was evidently gaining ground, when (according to the
historians) three horsemen, in brilliant armor, suddenly appeared at
the head of a reinforcement descending from the adjacent mountains.
Some of the clergy seized on this circumstance to reanimate the
Crusaders. "Behold your heavenly succor!" cried a bishop. "Heaven has
sent the holy martyrs, George, Demetrius, and Theodore to fight for
you!" As he spoke, the whole army seemed inspired with irresistible
strength; and, shouting the well-known war-cry, made another vigorous
charge which broke the Moslem ranks. The Sultan of Mossoul fled, and
his immense force dispersed in the utmost disorder. The extravagant
number of 100,000 is said to have fallen in this engagement.

The Crusaders, instead of proceeding at once to Jerusalem, remained
for several months in Antioch, employing the time in re-establishing
Christianity in that city, and sending to their brethren in the West
for further aid. The delay was prejudicial, as the disputes between
the rival chiefs, which the din of war had silenced, again broke out,
and disease committed terrible ravages in the camp. Certain
expeditions, however, were made in the neighborhood, and several towns
fell into the hands of the Christians. Meantime, news arrived that an
army of Egyptian Arabs--who acknowledged the Fatimite caliphs, and had
as yet resisted the attempt of the Turks to usurp dominion over all
the followers of the Prophet--had captured Jerusalem. The Crusaders,
filled with indignation, resumed their march to the Holy City,
conquering on their way several towns. Embassadors were sent from the
Caliph of Cairo with superb presents to the Christian leaders, and
proposals of peace between them and the Egyptians. But Godfrey would
not be bribed to accept the humiliating terms proposed; one of which
was, that only unarmed Christians should be admitted into the city.
The embassadors were sent back with the answer that the Crusaders were
on their march, and, if opposed, might extend their conquests even to
the Nile.

By daybreak on June 10, 1099, the Christian army came in sight of
Jerusalem. The spectacle transported all with mingled feelings of joy,
reverence, and remorse. Some fell on their knees and prayed; others
kissed the sacred soil; many wept for their sins; and the air ever and
anon resounded with the shout: "It is God's will!" The siege was
commenced at once, Godfrey fixing his camp on Mount Calvary. The
Egyptians had prepared for a protracted defence, by strengthening the
fortifications and furnishing the garrison with ample provisions. They
had likewise ravaged the neighboring country, and filled up the
cisterns so as to harass the besiegers as much as possible. Owing to
these impediments the Christians made slow progress. After various
disappointments, however, they at length manufactured engines of great
size and strength, shaped like towers, which were to be wheeled up to
the walls, so as to enable the besiegers to enter by means of
drawbridges. On July 14, 1099, at daybreak, the Crusaders were in
arms, and at the same moment the assault was made on various points.
Godfrey stood on his wooden tower, which was stationed near one of the
gates, and by voice and action stimulated his soldiers to deeds of
daring. His death-dealing javelin never missed its aim. The Egyptians
employed every possible agent of defence,--showering down boiling oil,
combustible materials, and various descriptions of missile, on the
heads of their assailants. During the first day the Crusaders were
repulsed at every point; but on the morrow fortune turned. The first
half of the day was with the Egyptians, who cast lighted torches
against the wooden engines of the Crusaders, and effected the
destruction of many. Godfrey was, as usual, conspicuous, and became
the mark of repeated attacks,--the cross of gold which surmounted his
tower especially enraging the Moslem. An incident, supposed to be
supernatural, was the immediate cause of the Christians' success.
Godfrey and the Count of Toulouse at the same time observed the figure
of a knight on the Mount of Olives, who with his buckler signalled to
the Christians that they should enter the city. The two leaders,
animated by a common feeling, cried out, "Behold St. George!" The
enthusiasm of the Crusaders from this moment was irresistible.
Godfrey's tower was first pushed close beside the walls, and in spite
of flame and missile the drawbridge was lowered. Then, accompanied by
several of his bravest knights, he dashed into the city. Others
followed at the same point; the gates were broken down, and Jerusalem
was taken. A horrible carnage of the Moslem ensued, in which Godfrey,
although unable to check, refused to share. His first act was to
retire from his comrades, and with three attendants to repair, unarmed
and barefooted, to the Church of the Sepulchre. His vow was
accomplished, and the desecration of one holy site atoned for by the
preservation of another yet holier. This act of devotion, so worthy of
the true Crusader, recalled from carnage those who had forgotten their
vows in the thirst for vengeance, and the whole army, led by the
clergy, followed him to the same church in penitential procession.

[Illustration: Godfrey De Bouillon entering Jerusalem.]

Godfrey's work was now nearly ended, and his reward came. The leaders
of the army, soon after the capture of the city, held a council for
the purpose of deciding to whom should be given the crown of
Jerusalem. No decision was arrived at; so many various opinions being
expressed, and so many interests at stake. Ten of the most esteemed
chiefs were then formed into an elective body, and proceeded to make
careful inquiries into the fitness of those who were proposed for the
kingly office. Godfrey took no part, it would seem, in either
discussion or inquiry, and displayed no sort of anxiety as to his own
claims. But the clergy and the mass of the soldiers were devoted to
him,--endeared as he was by a thousand memories of his piety, courage,
and generosity. On all hands the electors heard his praises sounded,
and, to the joy of the whole army, they concluded their labors by
announcing the choice to have fallen upon him. But, to the surprise of
all, he declined the offered rank. "I will not wear a golden crown,"
said he, "in a city where my king and Saviour has been only crowned
with thorns." All that his fellow-chiefs could persuade him to accept
was the title of Defender and Baron of the Holy Sepulchre, though he
did not deem it right to refuse the kingly authority. He soon had
occasion to exert his power, for the Caliph of Cairo had by this time
collected a large army, and was on his march to Jerusalem. The
Crusaders, though unfitted for a fresh campaign, prepared to defend
their conquest, and, at the head of his troops, Godfrey advanced
toward Ascalon, where the enemy was stationed. A battle took place on
the adjoining plains, in which the Moslem force was routed with
terrific slaughter. The city itself would have fallen but for the
covetous spirit displayed by the Count of Toulouse, who, unable to
obtain a promise that the possession of the place should be given him,
deserted Godfrey with all his men. A quarrel ensued between the two
leaders, but was terminated through the influence of their brothers in
arms,--Godfrey being ready to forgive any injury to himself for the
sake of the common cause.

The Crusade was now completed, but Godfrey's duties as king were yet
to commence. He set about fulfilling them with activity, fortifying
various important positions, subduing revolts of hostile tribes,
dividing the conquered territories equally among his generals,
according to the feudal system, and summoning an Assize, or Assembly
of his wisest councillors to draw up a code of laws. This code, which
long remained in operation, amply testified to the legislative wisdom
of the Crusaders. But the new state was not long favored with his
presence to enforce and exemplify its constitution. In returning from
a successful expedition against some Arabs of Galilee, he was met by
the Emir of Cæsarea, who offered him a present of fruits. Godfrey
tasted a cedar apple, and immediately was seized with illness. He
died, not without suspicion of poison having been thus administered,
shortly after reaching Jerusalem, commending to his comrades the care
of the holy places, and the state which he had founded. His age
scarcely exceeded forty years.

One of the most celebrated and beautiful Italian poems, the "Jerusalem
Delivered" of Tasso, has "the pious Godfrey" for the presiding hero of
the glorious scenes which it narrates. But there are no grounds for
supposing that his fame belongs to romance rather than history.
Contemporary writers have painted his portrait in no less flattering
colors than Tasso has used, and the poet's affectionate fancy has
scarcely exaggerated the tribute which the soberest historian may feel
warranted in rendering to the memory of the great and good Crusader,
Godfrey de Bouillon.




SALADIN[13]

By WALTER BESANT

(1137-1192)

         [Footnote 13: Copyright, 1894, by Selmar Hess.]


There are two great names in the tangled and somewhat tedious story of
Islam which stand out, deathless, from the crowd of sultans, viziers,
and Moslem conquerors--the names of Haroun al Raschid and Saladin. The
former has become the accepted type of a good and just despot; the
latter is the Bayard of his religion, the knight and captain, king and
magistrate, _sans peur et sans reproche_; whose enemies respected and
trusted him as much as his own people loved him. His conquest of
Jerusalem and overthrow of the Latin kingdom were but episodes, and
from his point of view, not the most important episodes in his thirty
years of war and victory. The History of Egypt, the History of Syria,
the History of the Mohammedan faith, contain more pages filled with
the achievements of Saladin than even the History of the Crusades.
Everyone has read of the battle of Hattin;[14] but of the healing of
the great schism and the restoration of Egypt to orthodoxy--a step
thought to be impossible and of the highest importance to Islam--very
few know anything. Let us endeavor to present the history of this
great man with some attempt to show the true proportions of his
achievements in the eyes of the East, if not the West.

         [Footnote 14: In the battle of Tiberias, or Hattin, Saladin
         completely overthrew the Christians and conquered their
         kingdom.]

Yûssuf ibn Ayûb--Joseph the son of Job--was by descent a Kurd. His
father was a retainer or follower of the celebrated Nûr-ed-Din (Light
of Religion), Sultan of Syria, the prince who, after many years of
humiliation, recovered some of the lost prestige of the Mohammedan
name, wrested many of their outlying strongholds from the Christians,
and prepared the way for his more illustrious successor.

[Illustration: Saladin and Christians. [TN]]

The caliphate was then divided into the Fatimite line, which reigned
at Cairo, and the Abbaside, which reigned at Baghdad. Both branches
had by this time fallen into a mere semblance of authority. The
bitterness of theological differences survived, and though for the
re-establishment of Moslem power, it was absolutely necessary that the
schism should cease, there seemed no likelihood whatever of any
change. The weaker of the two, since the rise of Nûr-ed-Din, was
undoubtedly the Egyptian house. The last of the Fatimite caliphs were
mere tools in the hands of rival ministers, and passed their ignoble
lives--_Rois Fainéants_--in their luxurious palaces. Syria, which had
been theirs, was lost to them, and occupied partly by Mohammedans of
the rival sect, and partly by the Christians. Their final fall,
however, was caused by internal dissensions and the quarrels of two
candidates for the post of Grand Vizier. Their names were Shawer and
Dargham. The former, unable to contend against his rival, applied for
assistance to Nûr-ed-Din, offering for reward a third of the Egyptian
revenues. The expedition which was sent in reply was the first chance
of distinction which young Yûssuf had obtained. The army, commanded by
his uncle Shirkoh, easily defeated Dargham and reinstated Shawer. Then
followed the reluctance to keep the terms of the agreement which is so
common in history; and when Shirkoh in return seized the city of
Balbek and held it as security, Shawer sent to Amaury, King of
Jerusalem, for succor. Amaury, the bravest if not the wisest of the
Crusader kings, thinking that here was a chance of striking a double
blow, readily acceded, and joining the Fatimite army forced Shirkoh to
retire. It was, however, only in order to collect new forces. Next
year he was back again. Alexandria was taken by his nephew, and held
for three months against the combined forces of Christians and
Fatimites. At last a peace was agreed upon: both Christians and
Damascenes were to retire, each party to have a share in the revenues
of Egypt. The first part of the contract was faithfully carried out;
the second part neither Syrian nor Christian expected to be obeyed.
And now the same ambition possessed the mind both of Amaury and of
Nûr-ed-Din. This was nothing less than the conquest of Egypt. Both
perceived that the Fatimite power was gone. Both realized the fact
that the country could easily be overrun. As for the Christian king,
he had dreams of a splendid and luxurious capital, grander than his
own narrow city set in the midst of the mountains; his knights,
orientals now and fallen from the old western rudeness, looked on with
envy at the luxuries of these weak Mohammedans; it would be a fine
thing to transfer the capital of the Christian kingdom in the East to
Cairo, leaving Jerusalem as a Christian Mecca, a city for the priests.
And the Syrian sultan, for his part, would restore the unity of Islam,
would unite Egypt with Syria, and by the strength of that union would
destroy the Christian and recover the Holy Places. These were schemes
worthy of statesman or of soldier. The only question was--how were
they to be realized?

The point which Amaury failed to understand was this. He who moved
first was bound to lose. For he would draw upon himself the other two.
Amaury moved first. We cannot follow the Christian king on his
disastrous attempt. It is sufficient to say that Shirkoh, after a
brief struggle, remained master of the field and of Egypt, and that
the fall of the Latin kingdom, thus rendered possible, was only
delayed until the consolidation of the new power was complete.

Immediately after his final victory Shirkoh died, and was succeeded by
his nephew Yûssuf ibn Ayûb, now called Salah-ed-Din (Shield of
Religion), el Melek el Mansûr (the Victorious King), and Emir el
Jayûsh (Commander-in-chief of the Forces). The Fatimite caliph, not
yet deposed, made him Grand Vizier. In other words this soldier of
fortune was master of Egypt and of the Fatimite caliphate. More
important still, if the King of Jerusalem understood the importance of
the fact, he acknowledged himself to be the vassal of Nûr-ed-Din,
Sultan of Syria.

The first step taken by Saladin, a _coup d'état_ which restored Egypt
to the orthodox sect, was the substitution of the Abbaside caliph's
name for that of their own prince in the Friday prayers. This was done
without the slightest opposition; contempt for the head of their
religion could not be more effectually shown; Saladin therefore boldly
proclaimed the name of the Baghdad caliph. It was received so quietly,
as the Arab historian says, "that not a brace of goats butted over
it." The last of the Fatimite caliphs died a few days after: it was
one of those deaths, so frequent in history, which occur so exactly at
the moment most convenient. Did Saladin order him to be bowstrung?
Probably. Such an act would be regarded as perfectly legitimate and in
accordance with the rules of the game.

[Illustration: Saladin.]

How the victorious emir, on the death of Nûr-ed-Din, succeeded in
making himself master of Syria and succeeding his lord; how he carried
on the war with the Christians unceasingly, would require in the
telling volumes. Many volumes indeed have been devoted to this
history. His two great achievements were the reunion of Islam and the
destruction of the Latin kingdom of Jerusalem. The latter at least, he
effectually accomplished. Western Europe was incapable of a second
effort so great as that mighty wave of enthusiasm which won back the
Holy Land and covered the plains of Asia Minor with the bones of
Crusaders. Richard Coeur de Lion and Philip Augustus, Frederick II.,
the kings of Cyprus, the Knights of St. John, carried on the long,
interminable struggle, but Jerusalem was lost.

Of the chivalry and honor of Saladin his biographers are never weary.
When, for instance, the Christians took Jerusalem they slaughtered
every soul in the place; their horses were knee-deep in blood. When
Saladin took the city he suffered none to be slain; when there was no
more money for ransom he suffered thousands to go free; to the weeping
widows and fatherless girls he gave purses of money and suffered no
outrage to be done to them. He divided them into three bands and
assigned an escort to each company. And then was seen the strange
spectacle, when the women and children grew fatigued, of the victors
placing them on their horses and walking afoot, or even carrying the
children in their arms. Again, why has no one painted that famous
scene when Richard Coeur de Lion wanted no oaths, but instead gave his
hand to Saladin in token of respect for his enemy and his own loyalty?

Such is the brief history of Saladin, a soldier first, always a
soldier, spending his whole life on the battle-field; the perfect
knight of the Mohammedans, fierce in fight, generous in victory,
faithful to his word, true to his religion, of a larger heart and
nobler soul than Coeur de Lion, the only antagonist who can be named
with him; one of the few out of the countless millions of humanity,
whose name lives and whose memory will never die; his life an example;
his history a monument.

[Signature of the author.]




EDWARD I. OF ENGLAND

By THOMAS DAVIDSON

(1239-1307)


Edward I., King of England, was the elder of the two sons of Henry
III., by his queen, Eleanor, daughter of Count Raymond Berenger of
Provence, and was born at Westminster, June 17, 1239. His name was
given him by his father out of reverence for the memory of Edward the
Confessor, and in its English sound, as well as in the honest English
temper, no less than the yellow hair and stalwart figure with which
the young prince grew up, Englishmen might well have read the promise,
that once more, after two hundred years, England would be ruled by a
native English king. Edward was brought up at Windsor, was given by
his father in 1252 the government of Gascony, and in 1254 married, in
the monastery of Las Huelgas, Eleanor, sister of Alfonso X. of
Castile, receiving immediately thereafter from his father Gascony,
Ireland, and the Welsh march betwixt the Conway and the Dee, where, in
fighting with the turbulent Welshmen, he learned his first lessons in
warfare.

[Illustration: Edward I. of England. [TN]]

At the Parliament of Oxford (1258) he took part with his father in his
contest with his troublesome nobles, but thereafter appears to have at
first sided with the great Earl Simon de Montfort, the leader of the
barons or national party, without, however, impairing his own personal
loyalty and affection for his father, with whom ere long he was
reconciled. It was his rash eagerness in pursuing an advantage gained
over the Londoners, who were devoted to the party of Simon, that lost
the battle of Lewes (1264), one immediate consequence of which was the
prince's imprisonment as a hostage for his father's pledges.
Conditions for his liberation, discussed at Simon's famous parliament
of 1265, were frustrated through Edward's escape by a stratagem from
Hereford Castle; and at the final battle at Evesham (August 4), where
Simon recognized in the skilful disposition of his enemy's forces a
fatal lesson learned from himself, the struggle practically ended with
the great popular champion's death on the battle-field. Edward gained
much influence by the wise prudence and moderation with which he
stamped out the last embers of rebellion.

In 1270 he started, at the instigation of Louis IX. of France, to join
the last of the Crusades, but when he reached Tunis, found that king
dead, and the expedition already desperate of success. He went on to
Acre, and won great renown as a knight, but failed to save the
Frankish kingdom in the East from its inevitable fate. In June, 1272,
while sitting alone on his bed, his own strength and energy saved him
from being murdered by one of the infamous sect of the Assassins.
Hastily guarding himself with his arms, and receiving a desperate
wound, from which he afterward suffered much, he tore the knife from
his assailant's hand, and buried it in his heart. The ancient story
that his queen Eleanor, who had followed him in his pilgrimage, saved
his life at the risk of her own by sucking the poison from the wound,
unfortunately lacks historical support, but fits well with the
romantic temper of the times, as well as with the deep affection that
survived throughout life betwixt husband and wife.

Two months later he started for home, and at Capua, in the January of
1273, heard of his father's death two months before. Meantime he had
been quietly proclaimed king, and as things went well in England, he
visited the pope, did homage at Paris for his French provinces, and
did not return to his kingdom till the August of 1274. At his
coronation he received the homage of Alexander III. of Scotland for
his lands in England, but Prince Llewelyn of Wales neglected the
summons to attend, and only did his homage in 1276, under the combined
terrors of excommunication and the royal army. Edward at once
commenced that wise and large policy of domestic consolidation and
financial as well as legal reform, that has shed such lustre upon the
reign of the English Justinian, as he has been called, and made it
almost the most important epoch in the constitutional history of
England.

His first warfare was with the turbulent and disaffected Welshmen, who
had profited by the intestine turmoil of the preceding reign, and
intrigued perpetually with the rebellious nobles of Henry III. for
their own ends. The forced peace of 1277, and the national
dissatisfaction at the stringent terms granted by Edward, which was
not abated by the personal favors he heaped upon the princes Llewelyn
and his brother David, were but the preludes to the final struggle
which commenced three years later, and ended in the complete
suppression of Welsh nationalism, with the defeat and death of
Llewelyn, near Builth, in Brecknockshire, and the cruel execution of
David at Shrewsbury, as a traitor, in 1284. By the famous Statute of
Wales in the same year, the ancient principality was finally annexed
to the English crown, while English laws and English institutions were
forced upon the conquered people.

Edward devoted the next year to legislation, then went abroad to
mediate, without success, in the quarrel between France and Aragon. He
had soon to return to quell fresh disturbances in Wales, and even in
England, where the great Statute of Winchester, which had been passed
in 1285 to place the defence of the country on a really national
basis, had not yet had time to effect its end. Finding that most of
his judges had been corrupting justice, he punished them with an iron
hand, next banished in 1290 all the Jews to the number of over sixteen
thousand from the kingdom, on the plea of extortionate usury. Earlier
in the reign he had hanged 280 for money-clipping and forgery.

Just at this time the death of the young Scottish queen, the Maid of
Norway, whom Edward had caused to be betrothed to his eldest surviving
son, Edward of Caernarvon, opened up a fatal contest for the Scottish
crown, which gave Edward his opportunity to assert anew the old but
somewhat shadowy claim of the English crown to the over-lordship of
Scotland. The southern half of that composite kingdom was inhabited by
people of English blood and English institutions; its southeastern
part, the Lothians, had undoubtedly once formed part of the Anglian
kingdom of Northumbria; while its southwestern, Strathclyde or
Scottish Cumbria, the population of which was in great part Celtic,
had in 945 been given by the English king Edmund I. to Malcolm as a
fief. The northern portion of the kingdom was purely Celtic in blood,
and had at no time been subject to English influences, but though the
reigning family was itself of Celtic origin, its authority hardly
extended effectively beyond the region inhabited by men of English
blood. Undoubtedly the Scottish king in 921 chose Edward the Elder "to
father and to lord," and the right then acknowledged was claimed
successively by William the Conqueror, Rufus, and other English kings.
Moreover, from the twelfth century it had been customary for the
Scottish kings or their sons to receive English earldoms, and do
homage for them, but it continued to remain somewhat vague whether
such homage was understood to be extended beyond these earldoms, so as
to include the Lowland provinces and the whole Scottish kingdom.
William the Lion, taken prisoner at Alnwick in 1174, for his freedom
acknowledged the supremacy of Henry II. in the treaty concluded at
Felaise on December 7; but on his return found his subjects
ill-disposed to accede to his cowardly submission; and fifteen years
later the claim founded on this special act of submission was formally
renounced for a sum of 10,000 merks by Richard I., who was eager to
raise money for his Crusade. Such was the ill-defined position of this
ancient controversy, when fate seemed to fling into Edward's hands the
opportunity of defining it anew with all the clearness dear to his
legal mind. It was easy for him to secure a recognition of his
superiority from the selfish and eager candidates for the crown, and
meantime he secured the Scottish castles, and after a deliberate
examination of the rival claims, decided in favor of John Baliol, who,
on his accession, paid homage distinctly for the whole kingdom of
Scotland. He soon found his position as a vassal-king intolerable,
betwixt the unruly turbulence of his subjects and the imperious
demands of his overlord, who allowed appeals to be led from Baliol's
subjects to himself.

Meantime the ambitious projects of the new King of France, Philip IV.,
involved Edward in anxieties for the safety of Guienne and his other
possessions in France. Ere long the high-handed conduct of the French
king made war necessary, and Edward, with characteristic energy, at
once began his preparations, and summoned in 1295 an assembly of the
estates of the realm, which was practically the beginning of the
modern parliaments.

The ever-increasing exasperation of the Scots at length broke out into
open warfare in 1296. Edward at once marched northward, captured
Berwick, and carried his victorious arms as far north as Aberdeen,
Banff, and Elgin, taking the great castles on the way, formally
accepted Baliol's surrender of the crown at Montrose, and returned to
Berwick (August 22), carrying with him the famous coronation-stone
from Scone, after having subdued the whole kingdom in about five
months. Here, six days later, he received the fealty of the clergy,
barons, and gentry of Scotland, whose names fill the thirty-five skins
of parchment known as the "Ragman Roll."

At length he was at liberty to turn to France, but the great cost of
his late expenditure had already driven him to make such heavy demands
upon the revenues of the Church, that the clergy now refused fresh
subsidies, headed by Archbishop Winchelsea and supported by the bull
"Clericis Laicos" of Pope Boniface VIII. The king retaliated by
placing the clergy of the kingdom in outlawry. At the Salisbury
parliament in February, 1297, the great barons also refused to take
part in foreign war, while the merchants were exasperated because
their wool had been seized. A compromise was soon effected with the
clergy, and a temporary illegal grant for the immediate purposes of
the war was procured from the nobles and commons who were with him.
Edward sailed for Flanders, and at Ghent confirmed the Charter with
such supplementary clauses as were demanded by his refractory nobles,
thus finally establishing the right of the people themselves to
determine taxation.

This is only second in importance to Magna Charta itself as a landmark
in the history of England. The suspicious fears of his people
compelled Edward to repeat the confirmation at London in 1300, and
again at Lincoln in 1301--an insult to his honesty which the king
never forgave, and to which his subsequent banishment of Winchelsea
was due. In 1303, and again the year after, Edward, in desperate
straits for money, levied, by agreement with the foreign merchants,
some new customs--the beginning of import duties, without consent of
the estates, and collected a _tallage_ from the royal demesne; and
again, in 1305, he obtained from Clement V. a formal absolution from
the obligations of 1297. It is true that the first two measures were
contrary to the spirit rather than the letter of his promise, and that
he never sought to avail himself of the dangerous power granted him by
the papal absolution, yet these three facts, says Bishop Stubbs,
"remain on record as illustrations of Edward's chief weakness, the
legal captiousness, which was the one drawback on his greatness."

It was the dangerous aspect of affairs in Scotland that forced the
king to submit so easily to the demands of his barons. Already, in the
spring of 1297, Wallace, without any countenance from the Scottish
nobility, had commenced a guerilla warfare, and his handful of
desperate men soon increased into an army, which completely defeated
Earl Warenne and Cressingham at Cambuskenneth (Stirling Bridge), in
September, 1297, and ravaged England, with the most atrocious
cruelties, from Newcastle to Carlisle. Edward's expedition to Flanders
had been a failure, but he hastened to conclude a truce, so as to find
time to chastise the Scots, cementing it by his betrothal to Philip's
sister Margaret. The good Queen Eleanor had been already dead nine
years.

Meantime, Wallace's success had merely earned him the bitter jealousy
of the Scottish nobles, and his power was finally broken in the
disastrous defeat by Edward's army at Falkirk in July, 1298. The king
had two of his ribs broken by a kick from his horse on the morning of
the battle, but rode throughout the day as if unhurt. The struggle
lingered on some years under various leaders, as Edward found his
energy paralyzed the while by the intrigues of Philip, and the
constitutional struggle with his barons. Pope Boniface, in 1301, put
forth a claim to the over-lordship of Scotland, which was repudiated
by the whole body of the estates at Lincoln. It was not till the June
of 1303 that the king was able to resume his conquest. Accompanied by
a fleet carrying his supplies, he penetrated again into the far North,
tarried a while in Dunfermline, and settled the kingdom after the
reduction of Stirling, the last place of strength that held out. In
1305 Wallace was betrayed into his hands, sent to London, and cruelly
executed as a traitor. The fate of this noble-hearted patriot is a
fatal blot upon his conqueror's memory, but it should not be forgotten
that Edward was profoundly convinced of the legality of his own claims
over Scotland, and that Wallace to him was merely a pestilent rebel,
who had earned his doom by treason to his lord and by the cruelties he
had inflicted upon Englishmen. The same year the king prepared a new
constitution for the conquered kingdom, divided it into sheriffdoms
like the English counties, and made arrangements for the
representation of the Scots in the English parliament--a measure
which, had it been successful, might have anticipated by four
centuries the benefits of the union.

It might now have been expected that Scotland was effectively subdued,
but ere long Robert Bruce, who had hitherto played a dubious game,
raised a revolt in the beginning of 1306, got rid of the regent Comyn,
his most serious rival, by a foul murder in Dumfries church, was
crowned king at Scone, and kept up an incessant but varying struggle
during the winter of 1306 and the spring of 1307. The treachery of
those who had sworn fealty to him, and whom he had trusted implicitly,
roused Edward to the pitch of exasperation, and at the knighting of
Prince Edward at Westminster, he swore a solemn vow to be revenged
upon Bruce. He at once despatched a force to Scotland, and though now
old and infirm, began preparations for his fourth expedition; but he
was attacked with dysentery on the march, and his malady increased so
much upon him that he died on the 7th of July, 1307, at
Burgh-on-Sands, near Carlisle, within sight of Scotland, leaving for
his son Edward the dying command not to bury his body till he had
utterly subdued the Scots, but to carry his bones with the army until
the victory was complete. Eleven days later the young prince reached
Carlisle, but returned a few weeks after to London, and buried his
father's body in Westminster, where it still rests under a slab, with
the simple but truly descriptive inscription: "Eduardus primus,
Scotorum malleus, hic est."




EDWARD III. OF ENGLAND

(1312-1377)


Edward III., King of England, the eldest son of Edward II. and of
Isabella, was born at Windsor, November 13, 1312. He was appointed
guardian of the kingdom, October 26, 1326, and received the crown
February 1, 1327. On January 24, 1328, he was married to Philippa,
daughter of the Count of Hainault. During his minority the government
of the kingdom was intrusted to a body of guardians with Henry of
Lancaster at their head, but was virtually usurped by Roger Mortimer,
until the king, irritated by his arrogance, caused him to be seized at
Nottingham on October 15, 1330, and conveyed to the Tower. He was
executed at Tyburn on November 29.

[Illustration: Edward III. of England. [TN]]

The overthrow of Mortimer made Edward, at the age of eighteen, a king
in fact as well as in name. In person he was graceful; and his face
was 'as the face of a god.' His manners were courtly and his voice
winning. He was strong and active, and loved hunting, hawking, the
practice of knightly exercises, and, above all, war itself.
Considerable care must have been spent on his education, for he
certainly spoke English as well as French, and evidently understood
German. He was fearless in battle, and, though over-fond of pleasure
was, until his later years, energetic in all his undertakings.
Although according to modern notions his ambition is to be reckoned a
grave defect in his character, it seemed in his day a kingly quality.
Nor were his wars undertaken without cause, or indeed, according to
the ideas of the time, without ample justification. His attempts to
bring Scotland under his power were at first merely a continuation of
an inherited policy that it would have been held shameful to
repudiate, and later were forced upon him by the alliance between that
country and France. And the French War was in the first instance
provoked by the aggressions of Philip, though Edward's assumption of
the title of King of France, a measure of political expediency,
rendered peace impossible. He was liberal in his gifts, magnificent in
his doings, profuse in his expenditure, and, though not boastful,
inordinately ostentatious. No sense of duty beyond what was then held
to become a knight influenced his conduct. Although the early glories
of his reign were greeted with applause, he never won the love of his
people; they groaned under the effects of his extravagance, and fled
at his coming lest his officers should seize their goods. His
commercial policy was enlightened, and has won him the title of the
"father of English commerce" but it was mainly inspired by selfish
motives, and he never scrupled to sacrifice the interests of the
English merchants, to obtain a supply of money or secure an ally. In
foreign politics he showed genius; his alliances were well devised and
skilfully obtained, but he seems to have expected more from his allies
than they were likely to do for him, for England still stood so far
apart from continental affairs, that her alliance was not of much
practical importance, except commercially. As a leader in war Edward
could order a battle and inspire his army with his own confidence, but
he could not plan a campaign; he was rash, and left too much to
chance. During the first part of his reign he paid much attention to
naval administration; he successfully asserted the maritime supremacy
of the country, and was entitled by parliament the "king of the sea;"
he neglected the navy in his later years. Little as the nation owed
him in other respects, his achievements by sea and land made the
English name respected.

It is said to have been chiefly through Mortimer's influence that, on
April 24, 1328, a peace was concluded between England and Scotland,
the chief provisions of which were that the Scots agreed to pay the
sum of £20,000, and that Edward agreed to recognize the independence
of the Scotch crown.

The treaty was very unpopular in England, and it is not surprising,
therefore, that, when Edward Baliol in 1332 made his attempt to mount
the Scotch throne, Edward III. gave him indirect assistance, and that
after Baliol's dethronement in 1333 an invasion of Scotland was
resolved on. On July 19 Edward defeated the Scots at the battle of
Halidon Hill. His army was in great danger, and was hemmed in by the
sea, the Tweed, the garrison of Berwick, and the Scottish host, which
far outnumbered the English. On the 20th he drew up his men in four
battles, placing his archers on the wings of each; all fought on foot,
and he himself in the van. The English archers began the fight; the
Scots fell in great numbers, and others fled, the rest charged up the
hill and engaged the enemy hand to hand. They were defeated with
tremendous loss; many nobles were slain, and it was commonly said in
England that the war was over, for that there was not a Scot left to
raise a force or lead it to battle. Edward ordered a general
thanksgiving for this victory. Receiving as the result of his victory
the submission of the principal Scotch nobles, he annexed the whole of
Scotland south of the Forth to his own crown, and allowed Baliol to
reign over the remainder as titular king. Soon after, Baliol was again
a fugitive, but was again aided by Edward to mount a nominal throne.

After a short period of peace Edward, in July, 1336, ravaged and
burned Scotland as far as Aberdeen, but growing complications with
France compelled him in the same year to return to England. Though he
professed to have a claim, through his mother, on the French throne
against Philip of Valois, that claim was left in abeyance until
several acts of aggression on the part of Philip brought about a
rupture between the two kings. The Count of Flanders, at Philip's
instigation, had broken off commercial relations with England; French
privateers were daily committing ravages on English commerce;
Aquitaine was continually threatened by desultory attacks; and Philip,
though he hesitated to accept the responsibility of being the first to
declare war, scarcely attempted to conceal his endeavors to throw that
responsibility on Edward. Edward sailed for Flanders July 16, 1338,
and at Coblentz held a conference with the Emperor Louis V., at which
the latter appointed him his vicar-general, and gave orders for all
the princes of the Low Countries to follow him in war for the space of
seven years. In 1339 Edward laid siege to Cambrai, but soon afterward
raised the siege and invaded France. Philip advanced to meet him, but
declined battle, and Edward concluded his first campaign without
achieving anything to compensate him for its cost.

In 1340 he defeated the French fleet before Sluys. The French fleet of
one hundred and ninety galleys and great barges was superior to his
in strength, for many of his ships were small. Nineteen of their ships
were the biggest that had ever been seen, and grandest of all was the
Christopher that had been taken from the English. Edward's fleet seems
to have been "to the leeward and westward" of the enemy, and about
noon he ordered his ships to sail on the starboard tack, so as to get
the wind which presumably was north-east, and avoid having the sun in
the faces of the archers. Then, having made their tack and got the
wind, his ships entered the port and engaged just inside it. The
French ships seem to have hugged the shore, and could not manoeuvre,
for they were lashed together in four lines. All in three of the lines
were taken or sunk, the Christopher and other English ships being
retaken; the fourth line escaped in the darkness, for the battle
lasted into the night. The king's victory was complete, and the naval
power of France was destroyed.

Shortly after his return to England a great tournament was held by him
at Windsor in memory of King Arthur. In 1346 he set sail on the
expedition which resulted in the great victory of Crécy[15] and the
capture of Calais. It was a strong place, and the inhabitants had done
much harm to the English and Flemings by their piracies. He built a
regular town before the walls, sent for a fleet to blockade the
harbor, and laid siege to the town with about thirty thousand men.
Meanwhile the Scots, who at Philip's instance had invaded England,
were routed at Neville's Cross, Durham, on October 17, and King David
was taken prisoner and confined in the Tower. In April some stores
were brought into Calais by sea, and after this Edward ordered a
stricter blockade; his fleet dispersed a convoy of forty-four ships
laden with provisions on June 25, and the next day a letter was
intercepted from the governor to the French king informing him of the
starving condition of the garrison, and asking for relief. Edward sent
the letter on to Philip, bidding him come to the relief of the town.
In July Philip led an army toward Calais. A portion of it sent to
dislodge the Flemings, who were acting with Edward at Quesnoy was
defeated. He appeared at Sangatte on the 27th. He was unable to get at
the English who were securely posted behind the marshes, and
challenged Edward to come out to battle. It is said that Edward
declared that he accepted the challenge; but it is probable that he
answered more wisely. Anyway, two days later, on August 2, the French
decamped. The next day the town surrendered at discretion. The
garrison came forth with swords reversed, and a deputation of the
townsmen with bare heads and ropes about their necks, prostrated
themselves before Edward, offering him the keys of the city. He at
first intended, or made as though he intended, to put the inhabitants
to the sword as a punishment for their piracies, but spared them at
the intercession of his queen. During the summer his army suffered
much sickness, arising from lack of good water. With some few
exceptions he banished the people of Calais; and sent over to England
offering grants and privileges to those who would colonize the town.
After agreeing to a truce for nine months, he returned home with his
wife and son, and after a stormy passage, landed at Sandwich on
October 12. All England was filled with the spoils of Edward's
expedition, so that there was not a woman who did not wear some
ornament, or have in her house fine linen or some goblet, part of the
booty the king sent home from Caen or brought back from Calais.

         [Footnote 15: See Edward the Black Prince for this battle, as
         also for the great sea-fight with the Spaniards.]

One more great sea-fight there was in 1349, when the Spanish fleet was
defeated, and now, indeed, the English were masters of the sea. From
this time Edward, as a warrior, retires somewhat into the background,
his place being taken by the Prince of Wales, who in 1356 won the
battle of Poitiers, and took King John prisoner. In 1359 Edward again
invaded France, and in 1360 he signed the peace of Bretigny, according
to which the French agreed to pay for King John a ransom of three
million crowns, and Edward renounced his title to the throne of
France, but retained his full sovereignty over the whole of the
ancient duchy of Aquitaine, the counties of Ponthieu and Guignes, and
the town of Calais. Peace was again broken in 1369 by Charles of
France, and when he concluded a truce with England in 1375 all of
France that remained in Edward's hands was Bayonne and Bordeaux in the
south, and Calais in the north. The last years of Edward's reign form
a sad and gloomy close to a career which had had a vigorous and
energetic commencement, and had afterward been rendered illustrious by
great achievements. His empire in France was virtually overthrown; the
vast expenditure which had had such a fruitless result was sorely
burdening his subjects, and awakening increasing discontent; and he
himself, through the gradual decay of his mental faculties, had become
a mere tool in the hands of Anne Travers, and of ministers whose only
aim was their own aggrandizement. In 1367 the "Good Parliament"
virtually seized the helm of the state from the hands of the king and
his ministers. The Black Prince was the chief agent in urging these
reforms, but his death, in the midst of the Parliament's
deliberations, for a time rendered almost abortive the good work he
had begun. Edward died June 21, 1377. Both in his home and foreign
relations he showed considerable prudence and sagacity, and he may be
allowed the merit of having endeavored as much as possible to keep on
good terms with his subjects. His expeditions were planned on a scale
of great magnificence, but he entered on his campaigns without any
definite aim, and his splendid victories were mere isolated
achievements, won partly by good fortune, but chiefly by the valor of
Welsh and Irish yeomen and the skill of English archers.

It has been observed, in regard to Edward III., by Sir James
Mackintosh, that "though his victories left few lasting acquisitions,
yet they surrounded the name of his country with a lustre which
produced strength and safety; which perhaps also gave a loftier tone
to the feelings of England, and a more vigorous activity to her
faculties."

[Illustration: Edward III. and the burghers of Calais.]

"During a reign of fifty years," it is added, "Edward III. issued
writs of summons, which are extant to this day, to assemble seventy
parliaments or great councils: he thus engaged the pride and passions
of the parliament and the people so deeply in support of his projects
of aggrandizement, that they became his zealous and enthusiastic
followers. His ambition was caught by the nation, and men of the
humblest station became proud of his brilliant victories. To form and
keep up this state of public temper was the mainspring of his domestic
administration, and satisfactorily explains the internal tranquillity
of England during the forty years of his effective reign. It was the
natural consequence of so long and watchful a pursuit of popularity
that most grievances were redressed as soon as felt, that
parliamentary authority was yearly strengthened by exercise, and that
the minds of the turbulent barons were exclusively turned toward a
share in their sovereign's glory. Quiet at home was partly the fruit
of fame abroad."




EDWARD THE BLACK PRINCE

By L. DRAKE

(1330-1376)

[Illustration: The black Prince's seal. [TN]]


Edward, Prince of Wales, commonly called the Black Prince, was born in
1330. He was the eldest son of Edward III., and a model of the highest
virtues of his times, a loyal son, and a brave, yet merciful, warrior.
He sailed with his father to attack the French in 1346, and though
only sixteen was knighted by the king immediately on reaching France.
He "made a right good beginning," for he rode with a small force on a
daring foray, and then distinguished himself at the taking of Caen and
in the engagement with the force under Gondemar du Fay, which
endeavored to prevent the English army from crossing the Somme. King
Edward and his small army compelled to face a far larger French force,
made some of the most daring and successful marches on record in the
annals of warfare.

At length they encamped in a forest, a little to the west of the small
town of Crécy. The French army, outnumbering them some say as four,
some say as twelve to one, was not far distant; but, confident in his
troops and himself, and animated by the memory of many triumphs, the
English king resolved to make a stand. The field of Crécy, from the
capabilities of the ground, was made choice of for the expected
battle; and the plan being drawn out by Edward and his counsellors,
the king, as the greatest and most chivalrous favor he could confer,
determined to yield the place of danger and of honor to the prince,
and in his own words, "to let the day be his."

To insure his success, most of the famous knights were placed in the
division which the Black Prince (as he was now called, from the sable
suit of armor he usually wore) was to command; while the Earl of
Warwick and the celebrated Sir John Chandos were ordered not to quit
his side, but be ever ready to direct and aid him.

Early on the morning of August 26, 1346, the trumpets sounded, and the
army marched to take up the position which had been selected on the
previous day. The ground was an irregular slope, looking toward the
south and east--the quarters from which the army were expected. The
prince's division, composed of 800 men-at-arms, 4,000 archers, and
6,000 Welsh foot, was stationed nearly at the bottom of the hill; the
archers, as usual, in front, the light troops next, and then the
men-at-arms, in the midst of whom was the prince himself, with twelve
earls and lords, as his staff. To the left of this, and higher on the
slope, appeared the second division, of about 7,000 men, commanded by
the Earls of Arundel and Northampton. On a rising ground, surmounted
by a windmill, aloof from the rest, was King Edward himself, with
12,000 men, as a reserve. The wagons and baggage were in the rear of
the prince, under the charge of a small body of archers. As the battle
was to be fought entirely on foot, all the horses were also left with
these.

Mounted on a palfrey, with a white staff in his hand, the king, with a
smiling and cheerful countenance, rode from rank to rank. By noon he
had passed through all the lines exhorting the men to do their duty
gallantly, and defend his honor and right.

The soldiers now had permission to refresh themselves, while waiting
the enemy's approach. They accordingly ate and drank at ease, and
afterward lay down in ranks on the long grass, with their bows and
steel caps beside them.

Meantime the French army had approached very near. Four knights had
ridden forward, and observed King Edward's plan of battle; when,
having seen how fresh and vigorous the English troops appeared, they
advised Philip, the French king, to delay the engagement till next
day, by which time his troops, now hungry and wearied, would be
refreshed. Philip at once saw the wisdom of this counsel, and one of
his marshals immediately galloped to the front, and the other to the
rear.

"Halt your banners, in the name of God, the king, and St. Denis!" was
the command given to the leaders. The advanced troops instantly
obeyed; but the others pressed on, hoping to be among the foremost.
This obliged the soldiers in front to move on again. In vain the king
commanded, and the marshals threatened; hurrying forward in
disgraceful confusion, the French, passing through a small wood,
suddenly found themselves in the presence of the English. The surprise
caused the first line to fall back, and thus increase the confusion.

The English soldiers now rose steadily from the grass, and stood in
fair and martial order on the hillside, with the standard of the Black
Prince in their front.

The sky had by this time become clouded; a thunder-storm came on, and
torrents of rain soon fell--slackening the strings of the cross-bows
of the Genoese archers, who had advanced to break the firm front of
the English bowmen. The clouds cleared quickly away, and the western
sun soon shone out bright and clear, full in the faces of the French.
At the moment the Genoese drew their arbalists, and commenced their
discharge, each English archer stepped forward a single pace, as he
took his bow from the case in which it had been protected from the
rain; and a flight of arrows fell among the Genoese, piercing their
heads, arms, and faces, and causing them instantly to retreat in
confusion among the horsemen in their rear.

The passionate French king, instead of trying to rally the fugitives,
at once ordered the men-at-arms to fall upon them. The cavalry, the
heavy troops, and the cross-bow men, soon formed a wild and reeling
crowd, amid which the English poured a continued flight of unerring
arrows, and not a single bowstring was drawn in vain.

Meantime the Count of Alençon, dividing his men into two parties,
swept round on one side of this scene of confusion; while the Count of
Flanders did the same on the other side, and, avoiding the archers,
furiously attacked the men-at-arms around the prince. England's
chivalry, headed by the gallant boy, met the impetuous charge with
equal valor and with greater success; and as each headlong effort of
the French deranged the ranks for a moment, they were formed anew,
each man fighting where he stood, none quitting his place to make a
prisoner, while growing piles of dead told of their courage and vigor.
The two counts were slain, and terror began to spread through their
troops. A large body of German cavalry now bore down on the prince's
archers, and, in spite of the terrible flight of arrows, cut their way
through, and charged the men-at-arms. By this time nearly forty
thousand men were pressing round the little English phalanx; but the
combat was renewed, hand to hand, with more energy than ever, while
the Earls of Northampton and Arundel moved up with their division, to
repel the tremendous attack.

King Edward still remained with his powerful reserve, viewing the
battle from the windmill above. The Earl of Warwick now called a
knight, named Thomas of Norwich, and despatched him to the king.

"Sir Thomas," demanded Edward, "is my son killed, or overthrown, or
wounded beyond help?"

"Not so, my liege," answered the knight; "yet he is in a rude shock of
arms, and much does he need your aid."

"Go back, Sir Thomas, to those who sent you," rejoined the king, "and
tell them from me, that whatever happens, to require no aid from me,
so long as my son is in life. Tell them, also, that I command them to
let the boy win his spurs; for, God willing, the day shall be his, and
the honor shall rest with him, and those into whose charge I have
given him."

The prince, and those around him, seemed inspired with fresh courage
by this message; and efforts surpassing all that had preceded were
made by the English soldiers. The French men-at-arms, as they still
dashed down on the ranks, met the same fate as their predecessors;
and, hurled wounded from their dying horses, were thrust through by
the short lances of the half-armed Welshmen, who rushed hither and
thither through the midst of the fight. Charles of Luxembourg, who led
the German cavalry, seeing his banner down, his friends slain, his
troops routed, and himself wounded severely in three places, fled,
casting off his rich surcoat, to avoid recognition.

This prince's father, the veteran King of Bohemia, was seated on
horseback at a little distance from the fight. The old man had fought
in almost every quarter of Europe; but, though still full of valor, he
was now blind. Unable himself to mark the progress of the fight, he
continued to inquire anxiously, and soon discovered that the day was
lost.

"My son," demanded the veteran monarch of his attendants; "my
son!--can you still see my son?"

"The King of the Romans is not in sight, sire," was the reply; "but
doubtless he is somewhere engaged in the _mêlée_."

"Lords," continued the old king,--drawing his own conclusions from
what he heard, and resolved not to quit the field alive--"Lords, you
are my vassals, my friends, and my companions; and on this day, I
command and beseech you to lead me forward so far that I may deal one
blow of my sword in the battle."

They linked their horses' bridles to one another, and placing their
venerable lord in the centre, galloped down into the field. Entering
the thickest strife, they advanced directly against the Prince of
Wales. Here the blind monarch was seen fighting valiantly for some
time; but at length his banner went down. Next day he was found dead
on the field of Crécy--his friends around him--their horses still
linked to each other by the bridles.

It was growing dark ere the angry Philip could force his way through
the confusion he had himself chiefly caused by the imprudent command
he gave at the commencement of the battle. The unremitting arrows of
the English still continued to pour like hail; and his followers fell
thickly around him. Many fled, leaving him to his fate; and presently
his own horse was killed by an arrow.

One of his attendants, John of Hainault, who had remained by his side
the whole day, mounted him on one of his own chargers, and entreated
him to quit the field. Philip refused; and, making his way into the
thickest battle, fought for some time with great courage. At
length--his troops almost annihilated, himself wounded in two
places--he suffered John to half force him from the field; and, with a
few of his lords, and only sixty men-at-arms, reached his nearest
castle of Broye in safety. At midnight he again set out, and did not
slacken his flight till he reached Amiens.

The gallant Prince of Wales still held his station firmly in the
battle; the utmost efforts of the French had not made him yield a
single step. By degrees, as night fell, the assailants decreased in
numbers, the banners disappeared, and the shouts of the knights and
the clang of arms died away. Silence at last crept over the field, and
told that victory was completed by the flight of the enemy. Torches
were then lighted, in immense numbers, along the English lines to
dispel the darkness.

King Edward now first quitted his station on the hill; he hastily
sought his conquering boy, and clasped him proudly to his bosom.

"God give you perseverance in your course, my child!" cried the king,
as he still held him. "You are indeed my son! Nobly have you acquitted
yourself, and worthy are you of the place you hold!"

The youthful hero had hitherto, in the excitement and energy of the
battle, felt only the necessity of immense exertion, and had been
unmindful of all but the immediate efforts of the moment; but now, the
thought of his great victory--which his father's praise seemed first
to bring fully to his mind--overcame him, and he sank on his knees
before the king, and entreated his blessing, after a day of such glory
and peril. And thus ended the battle of Crécy.

The prince had now fully established his character as a warrior. Two
or three years afterward, he showed that he could display equal
courage at sea as on land; this was in an engagement with the
Spaniards.

Peter the Cruel--as he was termed--was at that time King of Castile,
and encouraged, to a great extent, the pirates who infested the
English seas. His own fleet even, in passing through the British
Channel, had captured a number of English merchantmen, returning from
Bordeaux, and after putting into Sluys, were preparing to sail back in
triumph with the prizes and merchandise.

King Edward determined to oppose their return, and collected his fleet
off the coast of Sussex, near Winchelsea. When he heard that the
Spaniards were about putting to sea, he immediately embarked to
command the expedition in person. The Black Prince, now in his
twentieth year, accompanied him, and commanded one of the largest
vessels. The day on which the Spanish fleet would make its appearance
had been nicely calculated. Edward waited impatiently for its
approach, and, to beguile the time, made the musicians play an air
which the famous Chandos, who was now with him, had brought from
Germany. During the concert, the king, from time to time, turned his
eye to the watcher at the masthead. In a short time the music was
interrupted by the cry of--"A sail!" Ordering wine to be brought,
Edward drank one cup with his knights, and, throwing off the cap he
had worn till now, put on his casque, and closed his visor for the
day.

The Spanish ships came on in gallant trim. The number of fighting men
which they contained was, compared with the English, as ten to one;
and their vessels were of a much greater size. They had also large
wooden towers on board, filled with cross-bowmen, and were further
provided with immense bars of iron, with which to sink the ships of
their opponents. They approached, with their tops filled with
cross-bowmen and engineers, the decks covered with men-at-arms, and
with the banners and pennons of different knights and commanders
flying from every mast. They came up, in order of battle, a few hours
before night. King Edward immediately steered direct against a large
Spanish ship; endeavoring, according to the custom of ancient naval
warfare, to run her down with his prow. The vessel, which was much
superior to his own in magnitude, withstood the tremendous shock--both
ships recoiling from each other. The king now found his ship had
sprung a leak, and was sinking fast. In the confusion the Spanish
vessel passed on; but Edward immediately ordering his ship to be
lashed to another of the enemy, after a desperate struggle, made
himself master of a sound vessel.

The battle now raged on all sides. Showers of bolts and quarrels from
the cross-bows, and immense stones, hurled by powerful engines, were
poured upon the English. The Black Prince, imitating the example of
his father, had fixed on one of the largest ships of the enemy; but,
while steering toward her, the missiles she discharged pierced his own
vessel in several places. The speedy capture of his enemy was now
necessary; for, as he came alongside, his barque was absolutely
sinking. The sides of his opponent's vessel being much higher than his
own rendered the attempt very hazardous; and while, sword in hand, he
attempted to force his way, bolts and arrows poured on his head from
every quarter. The Earl of Lancaster, sweeping by to engage one of the
enemy, saw the situation of the prince, and immediately dashed to the
other side of the antagonist, and after a fierce but short struggle,
the Spanish ship remained in the hands of the prince; and scarcely had
he and his crew left their own vessel, before she filled and went
down.

Twenty-four of the enemy's ships had by this time been captured; the
rest were sunk, or in full flight; and, night having fallen, King
Edward measured back the short distance to the shore. Father and son,
then mounting horse, rode to the Abbey of Winchelsea, where Queen
Philippa had been left, and soon turned the suspense she had suffered,
since darkness had hidden the battle from her sight, into joy and
gratitude.

The French king, Philip, was now dead, and had been succeeded by his
eldest son John. Some proceedings, on the part of the new monarch,
were regarded as a signal to break the truce which had subsisted for a
short time between the English and the French. Various displays of
hostilities followed, and many negotiations were entered into without
success. The Black Prince, being appointed captain-general, sailed for
Bordeaux in August, 1355, and arrived there after an easy passage. His
first movements were always successful; and, even when winter set in,
the judicious manner in which he employed his troops enabled him to
add five fortified towns and seventeen castles to the English
possessions.

Spring and summer passed by--the prince still continuing active. At
length, the French king collected an immense army, and marched to
intercept him. Though well aware that John was endeavoring to cut off
his retreat, the Black Prince was ignorant of the exact position of
the French army, until, one day, a small foraging party fell in with a
troop of three hundred horsemen, who, pursuing the little band across
some bushes, suddenly found themselves under the banner of the Black
Prince. After a few blows they surrendered, and from them the prince
learned that King John was a day's march in advance of him.

A party, despatched to reconnoitre, brought back intelligence that an
army of eight times his force lay between him and Poitiers. Though
without fear, the prince felt all the difficulties of his situation;
yet his simple reply was--"God be our help!--now let us think how we
may fight them to the best advantage."

A high ground, commanding the country toward Poitiers, defended by the
hedges of a vineyard, and accessible from the city only by a hollow
way scarcely wide enough to admit four men abreast, presented to him a
most defensible position. Here he encamped, and early next morning,
disposed his troops for battle. He dismounted his whole force; placed
a body of archers, drawn up in the form of a harrow, in front, the
men-at-arms behind, and stationed strong bodies of bowmen along the
hedges, on each side of the hollow way. Thus, while climbing the hill,
the French would be exposed to the galling flights of arrows, while
the nature of the ground would further render their superiority in
numbers of little avail.

The French host now began to advance;--yet, as its ocean of waving
plumes rolled up the hill, the prince, in the same firm tone which had
declared the day before, that England should never have to pay his
ransom, now spoke the hope of victory.

Three hundred chosen horsemen soon reached the narrow way, and,
putting their horses at full gallop, poured in to charge the harrow of
archers. The instant they were completely within the banks, the
English bowmen along the hedges poured a flight of arrows, which threw
them at once into confusion.

The bodies of the slain men and horses soon blocked up the way; but a
considerable number, forcing a path through every obstacle, nearly
approached the first line of archers. A gallant knight, named James
Audley, with his four squires, rushed against them; and thus, almost
single-handed, he fought during the whole day, hewing a path through
the thickest of the foe, until late in the evening; when, covered with
many wounds, and fainting from loss of blood, he was borne from the
field.

Meantime the shower of arrows continued to pour death, while the
English men-at-arms, passing between the lines of the archers, drove
back the foremost of the enemy, and the hollow soon became one scene
of carnage. One of Edward's officers, named the Captal de Buch, at the
same time issued from a woody ravine situated near the foot of the
hill,--where, with three hundred men-at-arms and three hundred archers
on horseback, he had lain concealed,--and attacked the flank of one of
the divisions of the French army, commanded by the Dauphin, as it
commenced the ascent. This, with the confusion in front, and a rumor
that part of the army was beaten, carried terror into the rear ranks,
and vast numbers, who had hardly seen an enemy, galloped madly from
the field. The arrows discharged by the horse-archers now began to
tell on the front line of the enemy:--the quick eye of Sir John
Chandos marked it waver and open.

"Now, sir," he exclaimed, turning to the prince, "ride forward, and
the day is yours. Let us charge right upon the King of France, for
there lies the fate of the day. His courage, I know well, will not let
him fly; but he shall be well encountered."

"On! on! Chandos," replied the prince, "you shall not see me tread one
step back, but ever in advance. Bear on my banner! God and St. George
be with us!"

The horses had been kept in readiness; and each man now springing into
saddle, the army bore down on the enemy with levelled lances, the
Captal de Buch forcing his way onward to regain the main body. The
hostile forces met with a terrible shock, while the cries of "Denis
Mountjoye!" "St. George, Guienne!" mingled with the clashing of steel,
the shivering of lances, and the sound of the galloping steeds. The
sight of the conflict struck terror into a body of sixteen thousand
men, who had not yet drawn a sword. Panic seemed to seize them; and
these fresh troops, instead of aiding their companions, fled
disgracefully with their commander, the Duke of Orleans. This probably
decided the day.

King John was now seen advancing with his reserve, in numbers still
double the force of the English at the commencement of the battle. He
saw his nobles flying, but though indignant, felt no alarm; then,
dismounting with all his men, he led them, battle-axe in hand, against
the English charge. The black armor of the young leader of the English
rendered him also conspicuous; and, while the French king did feats of
valor enough to win twenty battles if courage could have done all, the
prince was seen raging like a young lion amid the thickest of the
enemy. Knight to knight, and hand to hand, the battle was now fought.
The French were driven back, step by step, till John found himself
nearly at the gates of Poitiers, now shut against him. While, however,
the oriflamme waved over his head, he would not believe the day lost;
but, at length it went down, and his hopes fell with it. Surrounded on
every side by foes eager to make him prisoner, he still wielded his
battle-axe, clearing at each stroke the space around him and his
little son, who had accompanied him through the fatal field. A knight
of Artois, of gigantic height, who had been outlawed and had taken
service with England, seeing that the monarch's life would be lost if
he protracted his resistance, suddenly rushed into the circle.

"Yield, sire, yield!" he exclaimed in French.

"Who art thou?" inquired John.

"I am Denis de Mortbec, a poor knight of Artois," answered the outlaw,
"but now in the service of England, because a banished man from my own
country."

"Well, I yield me to you," cried the king, giving him in sign of
surrender, his right gauntlet.

By this time nothing was seen but dead and dying on the field, with
groups of prisoners, and parties of fugitives escaping over the
distant country. The prince, by the advice of Chandos, now pitched his
banner on a high spot; and, while the trumpets sounded a recall to the
standard he dismounted, and, unbracing his helmet, took a draught of
wine with the band of knights who had accompanied him throughout the
arduous day.

The unfortunate French king was soon brought to him by the Earl of
Warwick and Lord Cobham. The prince received his vanquished adversary
with deep and touching respect. Bending his knee before John, he
called for wine, and, with his own hands, presented the cup to the
unhappy king.

By mid-day the battle was over; but, as the pursuing parties did not
return till evening, it was only then that the prince learned the
greatness of his victory. With eight thousand men he had vanquished
more than sixty thousand, and the captives were double the number of
the conquerors.

At night a sumptuous entertainment was served in the tent of the Black
Prince to the King of France and the principal prisoners. John, his
son, and six of his chief nobles, were seated at a table raised higher
than the rest; but no place was reserved for the prince himself. Great
was the surprise when the victor appeared to officiate as page. This
in the days of chivalry implied no degradation, though it showed the
generous humility of the young hero. John repeatedly entreated the
prince to seat himself beside him, and could scarcely be persuaded to
taste the food while his vanquisher remained standing, or handed him
the cup on bended knee. The respectful manner in which the prince
conducted himself, and the feeling he expressed for the misfortunes of
his foe, so touched John, that at last the tears burst from his eyes,
and mingled with the marks of blood on his checks.

The example of their leader was followed throughout the English camp;
every one treating his prisoners as friends, and admitting them to
ransom on terms named, in most cases, by the vanquished themselves.

After this event the prince again distinguished himself in France, for
the claims of his father, which the treaty had in part recognized,
were again disputed. Many battles were fought, and much negotiation
was carried on, extending over several years; while in the midst of
these harassments, the prince, who had long been ill, became worse.
His surgeons advised his return to England. He complied; but day after
day his strength failed him, and fainting fits of long continuance
often led those around him to suppose him dead. At length, on Sunday,
June 8, 1376, he closed a life which for years had been one sad scene
of suffering. He was interred with due pomp in Canterbury Cathedral,
his favorite suit of black armor being suspended over his tomb. Thus,
scarcely past his prime, died "the valiant and gentle Prince of Wales,
the flower of all chivalry in the world at that time."




BERTRAND DU GUESCLIN

(1314-1380)

[Illustration: Bertrand du Guesclin. [TN]]


Bertrand du Guesclin, Constable of France, the most famous French
warrior of his age, was born of an ancient but undistinguished family,
at the castle of La Motte-Broon, near Rennes, about 1314. The date is
doubtful, the authorities varying between 1311 and 1324. The name is
spelt in various ways in contemporary records, _e.g._, Claquin,
Klesquin, Guescquin, Glayaquin, etc. The familiar form is found on his
monument at St. Denis, and in some legal documents of the time. In his
boyhood Bertrand was a dull learner, spending his time in open-air
sports and exercises, and could never read or write. He was remarkable
for ugliness, and was an object of aversion to his parents. He first
made himself a name as a soldier at the tournament held at Rennes in
1338 to celebrate the marriage of Charles of Blois with Jeanne de
Penthièvere, at which he unseated the most famous competitors.

But this playing at fighting was not enough for his ambition; and in
the war which followed between Charles of Blois and John de Montfort,
for the possession of the Duchy of Brittany, he served his
apprenticeship as a soldier. As he was not a great baron with a body
of vassals at his command, he put himself at the head of a band of
adventurers, and fought on the side of Charles and of France. He
distinguished himself by a brilliant action at the siege of Vannes in
1342; and after that he disappears from history for some years. In
1351, having shortly before been made a knight, he was sent into
England with the lords of Brittany to treat for the ransom of Charles
of Blois, who had been defeated and captured by the English in 1347.
When Rennes was besieged by the Duke of Lancaster, in 1356, Du
Guesclin forced his way with a handful of men into the town, and
successfully defended it till June, 1357, when the siege was raised in
pursuance of the truce of Bordeaux. For this service he was rewarded
with the lordship of Roche d'Airien.

At the expiration of the truce he distinguished himself by the defence
of Dinan, and here he engaged in single combat with Sir Thomas
Canterbury. Shortly afterward he married; and about the same time he
passed into the service of France, and greatly distinguished himself
at the siege of Melun (1359). In April, 1364, in conjunction with
Boucicault, he recovered Mantes and Meulan from the King of Navarre;
and in May he defeated the Navarrese under Captal de Buch at Cocherel,
and took their leader prisoner. The king now created him Marshal of
Normandy and Count of Longueville. At the battle of Auray, in
September of the same year, Charles of Blois was defeated and killed,
and Du Guesclin taken prisoner, by Sir John Chandos.

The grand companies beginning, after the close of the war, to play the
part of brigands in France, it was necessary to get rid of them. Du
Guesclin was ransomed for 100,000 crowns, and was charged to lead them
out of France. He marched with them into Spain, visiting Avignon on
the way, and extorting from the Pope a large sum of money and his
absolution. Du Guesclin now supported Henry of Trastamare against
Peter the Cruel, set the former upon the throne of Castile (1366), and
was made Constable of Castile and Count of Trastamare. In the
following year he was defeated and captured by the Black Prince, ally
of Peter the Cruel, at Najara, but was soon released for a heavy
ransom. Once more he fought for Henry, reinstated him on the throne
(1369), and was created Duke of Molinas.

[Illustration: Bertrand du Guesclin.]

In May, 1370, at the command of Charles V., who named him Constable of
France, he returned to France. War had just been declared against
England, and Du Guesclin was called to take part in it. For nearly ten
years he was engaged in fighting against the English in the south and
the west of France, recovering from them the provinces of Poitou,
Guienne, and Auvergne, and thus powerfully contributing to the
establishment of a united France. In 1373, when the Duke of Brittany
sought English aid against a threatened invasion by Charles V., Du
Guesclin was sent at the head of a powerful army to seize the duchy,
which he did; and two years later he frustrated, by a defensive
policy, the attempt of the duke with an English army to recover it.
Finding, in 1379, that the king entertained suspicions of his fidelity
to him, he resolved to give up his constable's sword and retire to
Spain. His resolution was at first proof against remonstrance; but
ultimately he received back the sword, and continued in the service of
France.

In 1380 he was sent into Languedoc to suppress disturbances and
brigandage provoked by the harsh government of the Duke of Anjou. His
first act was to lay siege to the fortress of Châteauneuf-Randou, held
by the English, strongly garrisoned and well provisioned. A day was
fixed conditionally for capitulation. Meanwhile the great warrior was
smitten with a mortal illness, and died, July 13, 1380. The commander
led out the garrison and deposited the keys of the castle on the
coffin of the hero. Du Guesclin lost his first wife in 1371, and
married a second in 1373. His remains were interred, by order of the
king, in the church of St Denis.




HENRY V. OF ENGLAND

Extracts from "Memoirs of Great Commanders," by G. P. R. JAMES

(1388-1422)

[Illustration: Ritter's arms. [TN]]


Henry, the fifth English monarch of that name, was born at Monmouth,
on the banks of the pleasant Wye, in the year 1388. He was the eldest
son of Henry, Earl of Derby, and of Mary de Bohun, daughter of the
Earl of Hereford. During his infancy reverses and successes passed
rapidly over his father's head, and at the age of thirteen years he
found himself the eldest son of the King of England, and was created
by his father Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester.
The early education of Henry the Fifth is unknown; but it may be
inferred, that during the life of his mother, principles of high honor
and virtue had been instilled into his bosom, which became dormant,
though not extinct, as rising toward manhood, evil companions took
advantage of idleness and indulgence to call into action the passions
of the young prince, in order to lead him to their own purposes.

The tales of his debauchery, and the depravity of his taste, while a
youth, have been doubted and contradicted, but not disproved by modern
historians; but the positive assertions of older writers, whose means
of information was great and immediate, must always be more valuable
than the theoretical doubts of persons who live when a thousand
sources of knowledge have been buried under the lumber of ages. It is
therefore more than probable that, in his youth, Henry the Fifth gave
himself up to low companions, unworthy a prince and a gentleman, and
yielded to his passions indulgences which were forbidden by his
reason. Nevertheless, through the whole course of his youthful errors,
as portrayed by those least favorable in their account, there is to be
seen the gleaming forth of those better principles, that nobler soul,
which rendered him in after years one of the greatest and best of
English monarchs.

Out of a multitude of events which might be brought forward to prove
this fact, one of the best authenticated, and the most striking, is
his submission to Chief-justice Gascoigne. Henry, it would appear, had
entered the Court of Justice in support of one of his dissolute
companions, who had rendered himself amenable to the laws of his
country. Notwithstanding the presence and influence of the prince, the
magistrate did his duty toward the offender, without fear or favor,
and in the heat of the moment, Henry struck the judge upon the
judgment-seat. Still unmoved and unruffled, the chief-justice, without
a hesitation on the score of the prince's rank or power, at once
committed him for contempt of court.

Time had been given for the better spirit to assume her influence, and
struck with the conscientious courage of the judge, the heir-apparent
of the British throne submitted to the punishment he had merited, and
suffered himself without opposition to be led to prison, thus setting
a noble example of obedience to the laws. His father was of a mind
well qualified to appreciate the conduct both of his son and of his
son's judge, and when the news was brought him--probably by those who
sought to inflame the monarch's mind against the punisher of his
son--he exclaimed, with joy: "Blessed is the king whose magistrates
possess courage to execute the laws upon such an offender; and still
more happy is he who has for a son a prince willing to endure such
wholesome chastisement."

Although from all accounts it would appear that many parts of the
prince's conduct gave great pain and offence to his father, yet we
find that Henry IV. never scrupled to entrust to his care some of the
greatest and most important military operations of his reign. Whether
the prince had already displayed the qualities of a soldier, in a
degree sufficient to attract the notice of his father, or whether the
king sought only to habituate him early to that inevitable career of
arms which was in those days one of the misfortunes of royalty, we are
not informed; but so early as his sixteenth or seventeenth year he
fought at the battle of Shrewsbury, in which Henry Hotspur was slain.
What was the part assigned to the prince on this occasion I do not
find stated precisely; but all accounts agree that he proved of
infinite assistance and service to his father, and fought long in the
thickest of the battle, after having been severely wounded by an arrow
in the face.

The death of Percy spread dismay among his soldiers and allies, and
after a fight of nearly four hours the party of Northumberland fled,
leaving the king master of the field of battle, and a number of noble
prisoners. Many of these were executed either at Shrewsbury or London;
and the Earl of Northumberland, the chief support of the rebellion,
made his peace for the time to meditate his rebellions.

Owen Glendower, however, one of the confederates, was still in arms in
Wales; and while Henry IV. returned in triumph to London, he
despatched his eldest son, at the head of considerable forces, to
reduce the Principality to obedience. The unhappy Glendower, unable to
oppose the army led against him, was forced to fly, and, abandoned by
his friends and followers, is said to have died of starvation among
the caves and wildernesses in which he sought refuge. In the meanwhile
the Prince of Wales conducted his expedition with skill and wisdom;
the whole country submitted to his power; and having re-established
order and tranquillity, he returned to London with honor and praise.

Little further occurs in the history of Henry as Prince of Wales which
is interesting in itself, if stripped of the embellishments added to
it by the fancy of our great poet. A project of marriage between the
heir of the British crown and a daughter of the Duke of Burgundy, was
entertained for some time, but died away, and the opposite, or Orleans
party in France, was afterward supported by the English Crown. At
length Henry the Fourth, on the eve of an expedition to the Holy Land,
undertaken, it is said, in expiation of his usurpation of the throne,
was struck with apoplexy; and a tale, in regard to his death, is
current among the historians of the period, on which Shakespeare has
founded one of the most beautiful scenes in his historical dramas. The
poet, however, is far more indebted for the splendor of his materials
to his own imagination, than any historical record. The facts, as
related by the best authorities, are simply as follows.

After the first attack of apoplexy the king was carried to a chamber
in the house of the Abbot of Westminster, and put to bed, and at his
own desire the crown was laid upon his pillow. He languished in a
state of great weakness for some time, and at length, after a second
attack, appeared to those who were watching him to have yielded the
spirit. The chamberlain immediately spread a linen cloth over the face
of the king, and hastened to communicate his supposed death to the
heir-apparent, who, entering the room to take a last look at his
father's body, removed the crown from his pillow, and carried it into
another apartment. After a short time the monarch revived, and sending
for his son demanded, angrily, why he had removed the crown. The
prince replied that all men had thought him dead, and therefore he had
taken the symbol of royalty as his by right.

"What right I have to it myself, God knows," replied the king, "and
how I have enjoyed it."

"Of that," replied the prince, "it is not for me to judge; but if you
die king, my father, I will have the garland, and will defend it with
my sword against all enemies as you have done."

Not long after this conversation Henry IV. expired, and his son, the
Prince of Wales, was immediately proclaimed king by the title of Henry
V. But his change was not alone in name or station; his vices and his
follies he cast from him, as an unworthy garment, and assumed with
royalty a royal mind. The debauched companions of his youth were
banished from his presence and his counsels, and forbidden to approach
within ten miles of his dwelling. But at the same time we are assured
that they were not left in indigence or necessity. Wisdom and virtue
became the only recommendations which raised any one to his service,
and those who had proved themselves most worthy, under the government
of the former monarch, found themselves most readily welcomed by the
new king.

No sooner was the truce at an end which then existed between France
and England, than Henry himself proceeded to Southampton to take the
command of his army in person. The English armament put to sea, and
notwithstanding great preparations which had been made for defending
the French coast, Henry landed his troops in safety at the mouth of
the Seine, and immediately laid siege to Harfleur, at that time the
principal sea-port of Normandy.

The Dauphin himself advanced to Vernon on the Seine, and the famous
Marshal Boucicault, one of the most celebrated knights of his time,
gathered together a large force, and advanced toward the English army.

Nevertheless Henry did not suffer his courage to fail, and the siege
was continued with unabated vigor. At length the means of defence
began to fail within the town. Two wagons of powder, which the French
attempted to introduce, fell into the hands of the English; the walls
were ruined by the effects of the artillery, and at length the
governor agreed to surrender, if he remained unrelieved at the end of
three days. The three days expired without succor, and Harfleur was
surrendered to the King of England.

     [Here follows a long and glowing account of Henry's retreat in
     the face of the overwhelming French forces, and of his greatest
     victory, the famous battle of Agincourt.]

Shortly after his return to England, Henry was visited by Sigismund,
Emperor of Germany, accompanied by French ambassadors commissioned to
treat for peace under his mediation. But while Henry continued to
exact severe terms, the French gave him constant excuses for
proceeding in the war, by their efforts to recover Harfleur, which,
however, were constantly defeated by the activity of the English
monarch and his officers.

[Illustration: Henry V. rejects Falstaff.]

To conquer the former patrimony of the British kings seemed the
monarch's first object, and in a very short time he made himself
master of almost all the principal cities of the duchy. Caen, indeed,
resisted with devoted courage, and, after a severe siege, was taken by
assault; but the governors of the other fortified places in Normandy,
divided between the Armagnac and the Burgundian parties, had no
confidence in their soldiers or each other, and one after another
submitted to the power of the conqueror. Nor, indeed, did Henry spare
any means to obtain his purpose in such a bloodless manner. All his
proclamations announced that those who submitted should be safe in
person and property; and his address to all the French people holds
out to them that prospect of peace and protection which had long been
unknown amongst the dissensions of their nobles. The first person
of great influence, however, who joined the forces of the English
king, was the Duke of Brittany; and, though Henry exacted no very
great exertions from his new ally, the example of such a defection
from the crown of France was greatly in behalf of the invader. Rouen,
the capital of Normandy, however, still resolutely closed her gates
against the English.

The attack and capture of the Pont de l'Arche announced to the people
of Rouen, and to the King of France, that the war was about to
approach the gates of the Norman capital, and every exertion was made,
both by the Burgundian faction, who now held the king in their hands,
and the burghers of the city itself, to repel the English in the
attempt. A number of famous knights and commanders were thrown into
the city, which was, besides, garrisoned by upward of four thousand
men-at-arms, and fifteen thousand armed citizens, all eager in the
cause.

Immense efforts were now made by the English to force an entrance, but
the defences of the place were so strong, and the defenders so
resolute, that no hope appeared of effecting a practicable breach in
the walls. Many a sally took place, and many an assault, and many a
feat of arms was performed between the two armies. But in the
meanwhile the provisions of the people of the town began to decrease,
and a smaller and smaller portion of food became the allowance of each
day. At length the inhabitants, by murmurs and threats, compelled the
garrison to treat; and, after a long and painful negotiation, Rouen
capitulated, upon terms which could hardly be called unfavorable, in
the situation to which its defenders were reduced.

The news of the fall of Rouen had the greatest effect on the rest of
Normandy, and twenty-seven towns, or castles, immediately made
submission to the King of England, without even being summoned to
surrender. Nor was this immediate benefit the only advantage which
followed from the capture of Rouen. Dismay and doubt spread through
all France, and thoughts of peace and concession were entertained by
those who had hitherto breathed nothing but war and defiance to the
King of England.

Pontoise was almost immediately taken by surprise, Gisors and Chateau
Gaillard fell after a short siege, and the terrific news of the
advance of the English reached Paris, and induced the King, the Queen,
and the Duke of Burgundy to abandon the capital and retire to Troyes.

Henry's ambassadors, according to the desire of the French court, were
instantly sent to Troyes--where the weak king remained under the
guidance of his evil wife and her counsellors--and they soon sketched
out a treaty by which, on marrying the Princess Catharine, the English
monarch should be declared heir to the crown of France, to the
exclusion of the Dauphin and his lineage. This hasty treaty was as
hastily ratified, and Henry, with fifteen thousand men departed from
Rouen, and marching with all speed to Troyes, put the seal to an
arrangement which conveyed to him the throne for which he had fought,
by marrying the daughter of the French monarch. To the first articles
proposed was now added, at the request of Henry, that the Regency of
the kingdom, to the government of which Charles was totally
incompetent, should be entrusted to him, and no sooner was the
solemnity of his marriage completed, than he instantly took the field
against the Dauphin, leading the unhappy King of France and his whole
court against the natural heir to his throne. The town of Sens first
fell before the arms of England and Burgundy, and immediately after
siege was laid to Montereau, where the assassination of John the Bold
had been committed.

Henry also now took upon him the whole executive power of the
government. The governors of towns, the officers of state, the
magistrates and the dignitaries, were placed and displaced at his
pleasure. The currency of the country was altered at his suggestion,
and his counsels swayed everything in France. However, England was
still at his heart, and leaving a country that his sword and his
policy had conquered, as soon as he could do so with any security, he
carried his beautiful bride to be crowned in London.

The moment, however, that his foot was out of France, his interests in
that country declined; and the rashness of his officers brought
confusion and ruin into his affairs. Town after town was taken by the
Dauphin; and at length the Duke of Clarence, the English monarch's
brother, with all the chivalry that accompanied him, were defeated at
Baugé, in Anjou, and the duke himself, as well as three thousand of
his men, remained dead upon the field. This news, accompanied by the
further tidings that the Dauphin was advancing to besiege Chartres,
called upon the king imperatively to return to France; and leaving the
queen to follow at a future time, Henry set out for Calais accompanied
by four thousand men-at-arms and twenty-four thousand archers.

His coming gave new courage to the Burgundian faction, and struck fear
into the followers of the Dauphin. Scarcely pausing at all in the
capital, the English monarch advanced direct toward Chartres, before
which the Dauphin had already been encamped three weeks; but long ere
the English reached the town the gates were free, and the adverse army
with all speed retreated toward Touraine. Thither the English monarch
followed, breathing revenge for the death of his brother. Dreux and
Beaugency-sur-Loire were conquered by the way; but after pursuing the
Dauphin ineffectually for some time, the scarcity of provisions
obliged him to return toward Normandy. On his march back, he is said
to have fallen in with a party of the Armagnac faction, who retreated
before him into a castle called Rougemont, which was instantly
assailed and taken by the English. All who were within, the French
historians assert, to the number of sixty persons, were, by the king's
order, drowned in the Loire, a fact which accords too well with the
manners of the time and some parts of the monarch's own character. The
town of Meaux was the next object of attack, and a long and courageous
defence was made by the Dauphinois within.

The fall of Meaux, like that of Rouen, brought with it the surrender
of an immense number of other places, but this was the last great
military undertaking which Henry conducted in person. From Meaux he
went direct to Vincennes to meet his queen, who was at this time on
her journey from Calais, and thence proceeded with the King and Queen
of France to Paris, where various transactions took place relative to
the internal policy of the country. The court soon removed thence to
Senlis, where Henry continued to make his principal abode, till news
from the banks of the Loire roused him from inactivity.

[Illustration: Arms. [TN]]

The Dauphin, now finding the English monarch removed from his
immediate neighborhood, again advanced with all the forces he could
gather, and laid siege to Cône-sur-Loire, then garrisoned by the
troops of Burgundy. The town, hard pressed, was obliged to treat, and
agreed to surrender, without the Duke of Burgundy should give battle
to the Dauphin in its defence, before the sixteenth day of August
ensuing. The tidings were communicated to the duke by the garrison,
and at the same time a herald from the Dauphin defied him to the field
the day named. The duke instantly accepted the challenge, and sent to
all his allies, as customary on such occasions, begging their aid and
support in the day of battle. Among the rest he demanded the
assistance of forces from the King of England, to be led by such of
his famous leaders as he could well spare. Henry, however, though
already unwell, declared that he would send no one to the aid of his
good cousin of Burgundy, but go himself, and, accordingly, commanding
his brother the Duke of Bedford, to lead his troops from Paris and
that neighborhood, he himself set out from Senlis on horseback. At
Melun, however, his sickness had so far increased, that, no longer
able to sit on his horse, he attempted to proceed on a litter, but at
length was obliged to turn toward Vincennes, where each day brought
him nearer to the tomb.

The Duke of Bedford, led the English forces to Cône, from which the
Dauphin had already retreated, and the English prince returned just in
time to witness the death of his brother.

Henry already felt his danger, and calling his relations around him,
made those dispositions which he thought necessary for securing his
dominions to his child. He then insisted upon his physicians informing
him how long he had to live, and being told that his life could not
last much more than two hours, he prepared to meet death with the same
courage which he had evinced during life. After going through all the
ceremonial duties of the Catholic religion, he commanded some
particular psalms to be sung in his chamber, and died very nearly the
time his physicians had predicted.

Henry V. was a great conqueror, and a wise, prudent, and politic
prince. His two greatest faults seem to have been ambition and
cruelty; the first was an inheritance, and the second, perhaps, was
less an effect of a harsh nature than of hasty passion. We seldom find
that he committed any deliberate act of barbarity, and those things
which most stain his name were generally done under feelings of great
irritation. His conduct to the Earl of March, the heir of Richard II.,
and the respect he paid to the memory of that unhappy king himself,
are proofs of a generous nature; and of all his conquests, the
greatest he ever achieved was the first--that over himself.




JOHN HUNIADES[16]

By PROFESSOR A. VAMBÉRY

(1388-1456)

         [Footnote 16: Copyright, 1894, by Selmar Hess.]

[Illustration: John Huniades. [TN]]


Of his grandfather we do not know even the name; his father was a
Wallach, a common soldier; yet he himself was the greatest of
Hungarian heroes, the Grand Marshal, and later on the "Governor" or
Regent of Hungary; and his son king of that country. At the present
day, in the age of democracy, such rapid elevation is no such rare
phenomenon, but in the aristocratic middle ages it was really a
miracle, one that points to exceptional circumstances and an
exceptional man.

In Europe at that time the circumstances were indeed exceptional. A
new power pulsating with youthful life had arrived from somewhere in
the interior of Asia with the intention of conquering the world. This
power was the Turk--not merely a single nation, but a whole group of
peoples clustered round a nation, inspired by one single idea which
urged them ever forward. "There is no God but God, and Mohammed is the
Apostle of God."

The Mohammedan flood already beat upon the bounds of Catholic
Christendom, in the forefront of which stood Hungary. Hungary's king,
Sigismund, was able for a moment in 1396 to unite the nations of
Europe against the common danger, but the proud array of mail-clad
knights were swept away like chaff before the steady ranks of the
janissaries.

And herewith began the long series of desolating inroads into Hungary,
for the Turk was wont to suck the blood of the nation he had marked
down as his prey. He took the country by surprise, secretly, suddenly,
like a summer storm, appearing in overwhelming numbers, burning,
murdering, robbing, especially, men in the hopes of a rich ransom, or
children whom they might bring up as Mohammedans and janissaries. This
body, the flower of the Turkish armies, owed its origin for the most
part to the Christian children thus stolen from their parents and
their country. This infantry of the janissaries was the first standing
army in Europe. Living constantly together under a common discipline,
like the inmates of a cloister, they rushed blindly forward to the cry
of "God and his Prophet" like some splendid, powerful wild beast,
eager for prey. The Turkish sultans published the proud order:
"Forward, let us conquer the whole world, wheresoever we tie up our
horses' heads that land is our own."

To resist such a nation, that would not listen to negotiation, but
only thirsted for war and conquest, seemed already an impossibility.
Europe trembled with fear at the reports of the formidable attacks
designed against her, and listened anxiously for news from distant
Hungary which lay, so to say, in the lion's very mouth.

Against such an enemy a soldier of the modern type was useless, one
who slays only in defence of his own life and at the word of command,
whose force consists in the high development of the military art and
the murderous instruments of modern technical science. What was wanted
was an heroic soul, inspired by a burning faith like to that which
impelled the Mohammedan soldier.

This heroic soul, this burning faith, united to the tenacious energy
of youth, were all found united in the greatest Hungarian hero, John
Huniades, accompanied withal by a singular talent for leadership in
war. He could not rely for support upon the haughty magnates who could
trace their descent back for centuries and despised the parvenu with a
shorter pedigree and a smaller estate. He was consequently obliged to
cast in his lot with the mass of the lesser nobility, individually
weaker, it is true, but not deficient in spirit and a consciousness of
their own worth. Of this class he soon became the idolized leader.
Around him gathered the hitherto latent forces of Hungarian society,
especially from Transylvania and South Hungary and the Great Hungarian
Plain (_Alföld_), which suffered most from the incursions of the Turks
and were therefore most impressed with the necessity of organizing a
system of defence. It was these who were the first to be inspired by
Huniades' heroic spirit.

Before commencing his career as independent commander he, following
his father's example, attached himself to the court of Sigismund, the
Emperor-king, in whose train he visited the countries of Western
Europe, Germany, England, and Italy, till he at length returned home,
his mind enriched by experience but with the fervor of his first faith
unchilled.

He had thus passed the flower of his age when nearly sixty years old,
he repaired at his sovereign's command to the south of Hungary to
organize the resistance to the Turks. At first he was appointed Ban of
Severin, and as such had the chief command of the fortified places
built by the Hungarians for the defence of the Lower Danube. After
that he became Voyvode of Transylvania, the civil and military
governor of the southeastern corner of the Hungarian kingdom.

Before, however, he had reached these dignities he had fought a
succession of battles and skirmishes with such success that for the
fanatical Turkish soldiery his form, nay, his very name was an object
of terror. It was Huniades alone whom they sought to slay on the field
of battle, well persuaded that he once slain they would easily deal
with the rest of Hungary. Thus in 1442 a Turkish leader, named Mezid
Bey, burst into Transylvania at the head of 80,000 men in pursuance of
the sultan's commands, with no other aim than to take Huniades dead or
alive.

Nor indeed did Huniades keep them waiting for him. He hurried at the
head of his troops to attack the Turkish leader who was laying siege
to Hermannstadt. Upon this Mezid Bey, calling his bravest soldiers
around him, described to them once more Huniades' appearance, his
arms, his dress, his stature, and his horse, that they might certainly
recognize him. "Slay him only," he exclaimed; "and we shall easily
deal with the rest of them; we shall drive them like a flock of sheep
into the presence of our august master."

On that occasion was seen with what self-sacrificing enthusiasm his
soldiers loved their heroic leader. When they learned from their spies
the purpose of the Turks, they took all possible measures to secure
his precious life. One of their number, Simon Kemeny, who bore a
striking resemblance to Huniades, determined to sacrifice himself for
his leader. He announced that he would put on Huniades' clothes and
armor. The Turks would then attack him under the belief that he was
the celebrated chief, and while they were thus engaged the real
Huniades would fall upon them unexpectedly and put them to flight. At
first Huniades would by no means consent to this plan, as he did not
wish to expose Kemeny to such mortal danger; but at last seeing the
great military advantages likely to accrue from it he consented.

And so indeed it fell out. As soon as the battle began, the Turks,
perceiving Simon Kemeny in the garb of Huniades, directed all their
force against him. Kemeny, after a stout defence, fell together with a
great number of his followers, and the Turks, seeing him fall, set up
a general cry of triumph and exultation. Just at this critical moment
they were hotly attacked in the flank by the genuine Huniades. Thus
attacked in the very moment when they imagined that they had already
gained the day, the Turks were thrown into confusion and took wildly
to flight. Twenty thousand corpses were left on the battle-field;
among them were Mezid Bey himself, together with his sons.

Fearful was the rage of the Turkish sultan when he heard of the defeat
and death of Mezid Bey, and he at once despatched another army against
Huniades, which like the first numbered 80,000 men. This time,
however, Huniades did not let them enter Transylvania, but waited for
them at the pass, known as the Iron Gate, among the high mountains on
the southern boundary of Hungary.

The Hungarian army was not more than 15,000 men, so that the Turks
were at least five times as strong. But the military genius of
Huniades made up for the small number of his followers. He posted them
in a strong position in the rough pass, and attacked the enemy in
places where it was impossible for him to make use of his strength.
Thus more than half the Turkish army perished miserably in the battle.
Again their commander-in-chief fell on the field together with six
subordinate commanders, while two hundred horse-tail standards fell
into Huniades' hands as trophies of his victory.

These two splendid victories filled all Europe with joy and
admiration. Christendom again breathed freely; for she felt that a
champion, sent by a special Providence, had appeared, who had both the
courage and the ability to meet and to repel the haughty and
formidable foe. But Huniades was not content with doing so much. He
thought that by this time he might carry the war into the enemy's
country. The plan of operations was exceptionally daring, yet Huniades
had not resolved on it without careful consideration. In the meantime
through Huniades' exertions, Vladislaus, the young King of Poland, had
been elected King of Hungary. Huniades gained the new king over to his
plans, and by this means secured the co-operation of the higher
aristocracy and the armed bands which they were bound to lead into the
field at the king's summons. Huniades counted besides on the
assistance of Europe; in the first place on the Popes, who were
zealous advocates of the war against the Mohammedans; next on Venice,
which as the first commercial city and state at that time had suffered
severe losses owing to the spread of Turkish dominions; on the gallant
Poles whose king now wore the Hungarian crown; and lastly upon the
peoples of Christendom in general, whose enthusiasm for a war against
the infidels had been quickened by the report of Huniades' victories.
And indeed at his request the Pope sent some small sums of money, the
Poles furnished an auxiliary force, while numerous volunteers from the
rest of Europe flocked to serve under his banner. Although the
assistance thus furnished was comparatively unimportant, it
nevertheless served to increase his zeal for the daring undertaking.
He and his heroic companions were not only proud of defending their
own native country, but felt that they were the champions of all
Christendom against Ottoman aggression, and their religious enthusiasm
kept pace with their patriotism. If they did not get regiments sent to
their aid, they felt that the eyes of all Europe were upon them, ready
to grieve at their possible ill success, while their victories would
be celebrated by _Te deums_ in the cathedrals of every capital in
Europe.

The aggressive campaign was commenced without delay; Huniades'
resolves were at once translated into fact; he would not allow the
beaten foe time to recover breath. His plan was to cross the Danube,
and penetrate through the passes of the Balkan to Philippopolis, at
that time the capital of the sultan's dominions, where he kept the
main body of his army. About Christmas, a season in which the Turk
does not like to fight, amid heavy snow and severe cold, the Hungarian
army of about thirty thousand men pressed forward. Huniades marched in
advance with the vanguard of 12,000 picked men; after him the king and
the Pope's legate, with the rest of the army. The sultan, however,
with a large body of men had occupied the passes of the Balkans and
prevented their farther advance. This impediment, coupled with the
cold and severe weather, depressed the spirits of the troops, worn out
with fatigue. Huniades, however, raised their spirits by gaining a
victory; lighting one night upon a body of the enemy, 20,000 in
number, he attacked them at once and after a few hours' struggle
succeeded in dispersing them. Later on he took two large towns with
their citadels; and in three engagements triumphed over three separate
divisions of the enemy. Learning that a still larger body of Turks was
attempting to cut off his communications with the king's army he
attacked that also and put it to flight. After that he joined his
corps with the main army under the king; and indeed none too soon.
Sultan Murad suddenly arrived with the main body of his forces, which
he strongly intrenched in the narrowest passes of the Balkans.
Huniades saw that these intrenchments could not be forced, and did all
he could to entice his enemy down into the plain. This he succeeded in
doing. In the battle that ensued the king too played a conspicuous
part and received a wound. In the end, however, the Hungarians gained
the victory, and the younger brother of the Grand Vizier was taken
prisoner. So much success was sufficient for Huniades for the time,
especially as the natural obstacles had proved insurmountable. The
Hungarian army returned home in good order, and the young king made a
triumphal entry into his capital, preceded by a crowd of Turkish
prisoners and captured Turkish ensigns. These last trophies of victory
were deposited in the Coronation Church in the fortress of Buda.

And now something happened which had hitherto been deemed incredible;
the Sultan sued for peace, a true believer and a sovereign, from an
unbelieving giaour. The peace was concluded, and Hungary again became
possessed of those dependent (South Slavonic) provinces, which lay
between the territories of the Sultan and the kingdom of Hungary in
the narrower sense of the word. In three short years Huniades had
undone the work of years on the part of the Turks. The Sultan,
however, soon repented of what he had done, and continually delayed
the fulfilment of his promise to evacuate certain frontier fortresses.
For this cause the young king, especially incited thereto by the Pope,
determined to renew the war. Huniades at first opposed the king's
resolution, and wished to wait; later on he was gained over to the
king's view, and took up the matter with his whole soul. The
opportunity was inviting, for the Sultan with his main army was
engaged somewhere in Asia, and the Venetians promised to prevent with
their fleet his return to Europe across the narrow seas in the
neighborhood of Constantinople.

The Hungarian army indeed set out (1444) on its expedition, and
continually expecting the arrival of the troops of their allies--the
Emperor of Constantinople and the Princes of Albania--penetrated ever
farther and farther into the hostile territory. They were to be joined
by their allies at the town of Varna on the shores of the Black Sea.
When, however, the Hungarians had arrived at that town, they found no
trace of their expected allies, but on the contrary learned with
certainty that the Sultan had succeeded in eluding the vigilance of
the Venetians, had brought his army in small boats over into Europe,
and was now following fast on their track.

Thus all hope of aid from allies was at an end, the brave general and
his small Hungarian force had to rely on their own resources,
separated as they were by some weeks' journey from their own country,
while the enemy would be soon upon them in numbers five times their
own. Yet even so Huniades' faith and courage did not desert him. The
proverb says: "If thy sword be short, lengthen it by a step forward."
And Huniades boldly, but yet with the caution that behoved a careful
general, took up his position before the Sultan's army. Both he and
his Hungarians fought with dauntless courage, availing themselves of
every advantage and beating back every assault. Already victory seemed
to be assured. A few hours after the battle had begun both the
Turkish wings had been broken, and even the Sultan and the brave
janissaries were thinking of flight, when the young king, the Pole
Vladislaus, whom Huniades had adjured by God to remain in a place of
safety, until the combat should be decided, was persuaded by his
Polish suite to fling himself with the small band in immediate
attendance upon him right on the centre of the janissaries, so that he
too might have a share in the victory and not leave it all to
Huniades. The janissaries wavered for a moment under this new and
unexpected attack, but soon perceiving that they had to do with the
King of Hungary they closed round his band which had penetrated far
into their ranks. The king's horse was first hamstrung, and, as it
fell, the king's head was severed from his body, stuck upon the point
of a spear and exposed to the view of both armies. The Hungarians,
shocked at the unexpected sight, wavered and, feeling themselves lost,
began to fly. All the entreaties and exhortations of Huniades were in
vain. Such was the confusion that he could be neither seen nor heard,
and in a few minutes the whole Hungarian army was in confused flight.

Huniades, left to himself, had too to seek safety in flight. Alone,
deserted by all, he had to make his way from one place of concealment
to another till after some weeks' wandering he arrived in Hungary. The
bad news had preceded him; and in consequence everything was in
confusion. Again arose that difficult question: Who should be the new
king under such difficult circumstances? The Sultan's army had,
however, suffered so much in the battle of Varna that for the time he
left the Hungarians unmolested.

The nation was disposed to choose for its king the child, Ladislaus,
son of King Albert, the predecessor of Vladislaus. The child, however,
was in the power of the neighboring prince, Frederick, the Archduke of
Austria, who was not disposed to let him go out of his hands without a
heavy ransom. Under these circumstances the more powerful nobles in
Hungary took advantage of the confusion to strengthen each his own
position at the expense of the nation. At first the government of the
country was entrusted to a number of captains, but this proved so
evidently disastrous that the better sort of people succeeded in
having them abolished and Huniades established as sole governor. For
all that, however, Huniades had a good deal of trouble with the chief
aristocrats, Garay, Czillei, Ujlaki, who, envying the parvenu his
sudden promotion and despising his obscure origin, took up arms to
resist his authority. Thus Huniades, instead of blunting the edge of
his sword upon foreign foes, had to bridle the insubordination of his
own countrymen. Luckily it did not take long to force the discontented
to own the weight of his arm and his superiority as a military leader.

Order being thus to some extent re-established at home, Huniades was
again able to turn his attention to the Turks. He felt that he had in
fact gained the battle of Varna, which was only lost through the
jealous humor of a youthful king; that it behoved him not to stop half
way; that it was his duty to continue offensive operations. But in so
doing he had to rely upon his own proper forces. It is true that he
was governor of the country, but for the purpose of offensive warfare
beyond the frontier he could not gain the consent of the great nobles.

Luckily his private property had enormously increased by this time.
The Hungarian Constitution ordered the king to bestow the estates of
such noblemen, as died without male heirs or had been condemned for
any offence, on such noblemen as had approved themselves valiant
defenders of the country. Now where could be found a more worthy
recipient of such estates than Huniades, to whom the public treasury
was besides a debtor on account of the sums he disbursed for the
constant warfare he maintained against the Turks? Especially in the
south of Hungary a whole series of lordly estates, many of them
belonging to the crown, had come into Huniades' hands, either as
pledges for the repayment of the money he had paid his soldiers, or as
his own private property.

The yearly revenue arising from these vast estates was employed by
Huniades not in personal expenditure but in the defence of his
country. He himself lived as simply as anyone of his soldiers, and
recognized no other use of money than as a weapon to be used for the
defence of Christendom against Islam. In the early morn while all his
suite still slept he passed hours in prayer before the altar in the
dimly lighted church, imploring the help of the Almighty for the
attainment of his sole object in life--the destruction of the Turkish
power. At last (1448) he set out against the Sultan with a picked army
of 24,000 of his most trusty soldiers.

This time it was on the frontier of Servia, on the so-called Field of
Blackbirds, that Huniades encountered Sultan Murad, as before with an
army of 150,000 men--more than five times the number of the
Christians. Huniades at first withdrew himself into his intrenched
camp, but in a few days felt himself strong enough to engage with the
enemy on the open field. The battle lasted without interruption for
two days and a night. Huniades himself was several times in deadly
peril. Once his horse was shot under him. He was to be found wherever
assistance, support, encouragement were needed. At last on the morning
of the third day as the Turks who had received reinforcements were
about to renew the attack, the Voyvode of Wallachia passed over to the
side of the Turks. The voyvode belonged to the Orthodox Eastern
Church. He had joined Huniades on the way, and his desertion
transferred 6,000 men from one side to the other, and decided the
battle in favor of the Turks. The Hungarians, worn out by fatigue,
fell into a discouragement, while Huniades had no fresh troops to
bring up to their support. The battle came to a sudden end. Seventeen
thousand Hungarian corpses strewed the field, but the loss of the
Turks was more than 30,000 men.

Huniades again left to himself had again to make his escape. At first
he only dismissed his military suite; afterwards he separated from his
faithful servant in the hope that separately they might more easily
baffle their pursuers. Next he had to turn his horse adrift, as the
poor animal was incapable of continuing his journey. Thus he made his
way alone and on foot toward the frontiers of his native land. After a
while looking down from the top of a piece of elevated ground he
perceived a large body of Turks from whom he hid himself in a
neighboring lake. He thus escaped this danger, but only to encounter
another. At a turn of the road he came so suddenly upon a party of
Turkish plunderers as to be unable to escape from them, and thus
became their prisoner. But the Turks did not recognize him, and
leaving him in the hands of two of their number the rest went on in
search of more prey. His two guards soon came to blows with one
another about a heavy gold cross which they had found on the person of
their captive, and, while they were thus quarrelling, Huniades
suddenly wrenched his sword out of the hand of one of the two Turks
and cut off his head, upon which the other took to flight, and
Huniades was again free.

In the meantime, however, George, the Prince of Servia, who took part
with the aristocratic malcontents, and out of pure hatred to Huniades
had, in spite of his being a Christian, gone over to the side of the
Turks, had given strict orders that all Hungarian stragglers were to
be apprehended and brought before him. In this way Huniades fell into
the hands of some Servian peasants who delivered him to their prince.
Nor did he regain his liberty without the payment of a heavy ransom,
leaving his son, Ladislaus, as hostage in his stead.

He thus returned home amid a thousand perils and with the painful
experience that Europe left him to his own resources to fight as he
best could against the ever-advancing Turks. The dependencies of the
Hungarian crown, Servia and Wallachia, on whose recovery he had spent
so much blood and treasure, instead of supporting him as might be
expected of Christian countries threw themselves in a suicidal manner
into the arms of the Turks. They hoped by their ready submission to
find favor in the eyes of the irresistible conquerors, by whom,
however, they were a little later on devoured.

After these events Huniades continued to act as Governor or Regent of
Hungary for five years more, by which time the young Ladislaus, son of
King Albert, attained his majority. In 1453 he finally laid down his
dignity as governor, and gave over the power into the hands of the
young king, Ladislaus V., whom Huniades had first to liberate by force
of arms from his uncle, Frederick of Austria, before he could set him
on the throne of Hungary. The young king, of German origin had,
however, hardly become emancipated from his guardian, when he fell
under the influence of his other uncle, Ulric Czillei. This Czillei
was a great nobleman of Styria, but was withal possessed of large
estates in Hungary. As a foreigner and as a relative of King
Sigismund, he had long viewed with an evil eye Huniades' elevation. On
one occasion Huniades had to inflict punishment on him. He
consequently now did everything he could to induce the young king, his
nephew, to hate the great captain as he himself did. He sought to
infuse jealousy into his mind and to lead him to believe that Huniades
aimed at the crown. His slanders found the readier credence in the
mind of the youthful sovereign as he was completely stupefied by an
uninterrupted course of debauchery. At last the king was brought to
agree to a plan for ensnaring the great man who so often jeoparded his
life and his substance in the defence of his country and religion.
They summoned him in the king's name to Vienna, where Ladislaus as an
Austrian prince was then staying, with the intention of waylaying and
murdering him. But Huniades got wind of the whole plot, and, when he
arrived at the place of ambush, it was at the head of 2,000 picked
Hungarian warriors. Thus it was Czillei who fell into the snare.
"Wretched creature!" exclaimed Huniades; "thou hast fallen into the
pit thou diggedst for me; were it not that I regard the dignity of the
king and my own humanity, thou shouldst suffer a punishment
proportioned to thy crime. As it is, I let thee off this time, but
come no more into my sight or thou shalt pay for it with thy life."

Such magnanimity, however, did not disarm the hostility of those who
surrounded the king. On the pretence of treason against the king
Huniades was deprived of all his offices and all his estates. The
document is still to be seen in the Hungarian State Archives, in which
the king, led astray by the jealousies that prevailed among his
councillors, represents every virtue of the hero as a crime, and
condemns him to exile.

Fortunately Czillei himself soon fell into disfavor; the Germans
themselves overthrew him; and the king, now better informed, replaced
Huniades in the post of Captain-General of the Kingdom.

Huniades, who had been living meanwhile retired in one of his castles,
now complied with the king's wish without difficulty or hesitation,
and again assumed the highest military command. Instead of seeking how
to revenge himself after the manner of ordinary men, he only thought
of the great enemy of his country, the Turk. And indeed, as it was,
threatening clouds hung over the horizon in the southeast.

A new sultan had come to the throne, Mohammed II., one of the greatest
sovereigns of the house of Othman. He began his reign with the
occupation of Constantinople (1453), and thus destroyed the last
refuge of the Byzantine Empire. At the news of this event all Europe
burst into a chorus of lamentation. The whole importance of the
Eastern Question at once presented itself before the nations of
Christendom. It was at once understood that the new conqueror would
not remain idle within the crumbling walls of Constantinople. And
indeed in no long time was published the proud _mot d'ordre_ "As there
is but one God in heaven, so there shall be but one master upon
earth."

Huniades looked toward Constantinople with heavy heart. He foresaw the
outburst of the storm which would in the first place fall upon his own
country, threatening it with utter ruin. Huniades, so it seemed, was
again left alone in the defence of Christendom.

The approaching danger was delayed for a few years, but in 1456
Mohammed, having finally established himself in Constantinople, set
out with the intention of striking a fatal blow against Hungary. On
the borders of that country, on the bank of the Danube, on what was,
properly speaking Servian territory, stood the fortress of Belgrade.
When the danger from the Turks became imminent, the kings of Hungary
purchased the place from the despots of Servia, giving them in
exchange several extensive estates in Hungary, and had at great
expense turned it into a vast fortress, at that time supposed to be
impregnable. Mohammed determined to take the place, and to this end
made the most extensive preparations. He led to the walls of Belgrade
an army of not less than 150,000 men. The approach of this immense
host so terrified the young king that he left Hungary and took refuge
in Vienna along with his uncle and counsellor, Czillei.

Huniades alone remained at his post, resolute like a lion attacked.
The energy of the old leader--he was now sixty-eight years old--was
only steeled by the greatness of the danger; his forethought and his
mental resources were but increased. As he saw that it would be
impossible to do anything with a small army, he sent his friend, John
Capistran, an Italian Franciscan, a man animated by a burning zeal
akin to his own, to preach a crusade against the enemies of
Christendom through the towns and villages of the Great Hungarian
Plain. This the friar did to such effect that in a few weeks he had
collected 60,000 men, ready to fight in defence of the Cross. This
army of Crusaders--the last in the history of the nations--had for its
gathering cry the bells of the churches, for its arms, scythes and
axes, Christ for its leader, and John Huniades and John Capistran for
his lieutenants.

The two greatest leaders in war of that day contended for the
possession of Belgrade. The same army now surrounded that fortress
which a few years before had stormed Constantinople reputed
impregnable. The same hero defended it who had so often in the course
of a single decennium defeated the Turkish foe in an offensive war,
who now, regardless of danger, with a small but faithful band of
followers, was prepared to do all that courage, resolution, and
prudence might effect.

Many hundred large cannon began to break down the stone ramparts; many
hundred boats forming a river flotilla covered the Danube, so as to
cut off all communication between the fortress and Hungary. During
this time Huniades' son Ladislaus, and his brother-in-law Michael
Szilágyi, were in command in the fortress. Huniades' first daring plan
was to force his way through the blockading flotilla, and enter
Belgrade before the eyes of the whole Turkish army, taking with him
his own soldiers and Capistran's crusaders. The plan completely
succeeded. With his own flotilla of boats he broke through that of the
Turks and made his entrance into the fortress in triumph. After this
the struggle was continued with equal resolution and ability on both
sides; such advantage as the Christians derived from the protection
afforded by the fortifications being fully compensated by the enormous
superiority in numbers both of men and cannon on the part of the
Turks. Without example in the history of the storming of fortresses
was the stratagem practised by Huniades when he permitted the picked
troops of the enemy, the janissaries, to penetrate within the
fortification and there destroyed them in the place they thought they
had taken. Ten thousand janissaries had already swarmed into the town
and were preparing to attack the bridges and gates of the citadel,
when Huniades ordered fagots soaked in pitch and sulphur and other
combustibles to be flung from the ramparts into the midst of the
crowded ranks of the janissaries. The fire seized on their loose
garments, and in a short time the whole body was a sea of fire. Every
one sought to fly. Then it was that Huniades sallied out with his
picked band, while Capistran with a tall cross in his hand and the cry
of "Jesus" on his lips followed with his crowd of fanatics, the cannon
of the fortress played upon the Turkish camp, the Sultan himself was
wounded and swept along by the stream of fugitives. Forty thousand
Turks were left dead upon the field, four thousand were taken
prisoners and three thousand cannon were captured.

According to the opinion of Huniades himself the Turks had never
suffered such a severe defeat. Its value as far as the Hungarians were
concerned was heightened by the fact that the ambitious Sultan was
personally humiliated. There was now great joy in Europe. At the news
of the brilliant victory _Te deum_ was sung in all the more important
cities throughout Europe, and the Pope wished to compliment Huniades
with a crown.

Alas! a crown of another character awaited him--that of his Redeemer,
in whose name he lived, fought, and fell. The exhalations from the
vast number of unburied or imperfectly buried bodies, festering in the
heat of summer, gave rise to an epidemic in the Christian camp, and to
this the great leader fell a victim. Huniades died August 11, 1456, in
the sixty-eighth year of his age. He died amid the intoxication of his
greatest victory, idolized by his followers, having once more
preserved his country from imminent ruin. Could he have desired a more
glorious death?

He went to his last rest with the consciousness that he had fulfilled
his mission, having designed great things and having accomplished
them.

And the result of his lifelong efforts survived him. His great enemy
the Turk for half a century after his death could only harass the
frontier of his native land; and his country, a few years after his
death placed on the royal throne his son Matthias.

[Signature of the author.]




WARWICK, THE KING-MAKER

(1420-1471)


Richard Neville, Earl of Warwick, called the king-maker, eldest son of
Richard, Earl of Salisbury and Alice Montacute, was born November 22,
1428. The history of this mighty peer is that of the whole of the
contest between the two houses of York and Lancaster. The house of
Neville had been built up by a series of wealthy marriages, and
Richard made no exception to the rule. While yet a boy he was married
to Anne, daughter of the Earl of Warwick, and through her, after the
death of her brother and niece, he took his place at the age of
twenty-one among the chief earls of the English realm. By this time
the English rule in France had broken down, bringing the reigning
house of Lancaster into great unpopularity, and throwing a
correspondingly greater influence into the hands of the leader of the
opposition, Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York. He was brother-in-law
to the Earl of Salisbury, and so attached to his party the powerful
influence of the Nevilles.

[Illustration: Huniades at Belgrade.]

The Duke of York at first made no claim to the throne, demanding only
that he should have his place in the councils of the king, and even
when swords were drawn the Yorkists swore their allegiance to the
king, Henry VI., while fighting against his advisers. Of these
favorites of the king, the chief was the Earl of Somerset, whom many
suspected of a design to establish himself as the successor to the
throne. It was between these two factions of York and Somerset, that
the white and red roses were first employed as distinguishing badges.

[Illustration: Warwick. [TN]]

  _Plantagenet._ Let him, that is a true born gentleman,
                 And stands upon the honor of his birth,
                 If he suppose that I have pleaded truth,
                 From off this brier pluck a white rose with me.

  _Somerset._    Let him that is no coward, nor no flatterer,
                 But dare maintain the party of the truth,
                 Pluck a red rose from off this thorn with me.

  _Warwick._     I love no colors; and, without all color
                 Of base insinuating flattery,
                 I pluck this white rose with Plantagenet.
                                         --_Shakespeare: I Henry VI._

The Wars of the Roses began with the battle of St. Albans (1455), in
which Somerset was killed. The victory was gained to the Yorkists
chiefly by the help of Warwick. By a sudden sally into the streets of
the town he routed the royal forces, and gained for himself that
character of daring and courage which he maintained to the end. He was
rewarded with the post of Captain of Calais, which he retained
throughout the changes of the parties. In this position he was
practically independent, and scoured the Channel at his pleasure.

In 1458 he attacked some vessels which were under a treaty of peace
with England, and being summoned to London to answer before the king,
was violently attacked by the followers of Somerset and barely escaped
with his life. In 1459 the civil war finally broke out. In the first
campaign the Yorkists failed, owing to their inactivity. The leaders
fled to the coast of Devon, where they hired five men to carry them to
Bristol. As soon as they left land, Warwick, stripped to the doublet,
took the helm, and steered straight for Calais, where he arrived in a
few days. When Somerset, son of the earl slain at St. Albans, came to
claim the keys of the stronghold, he had the mortification to find
Warwick there before him.

Warwick was next in England on June 27, 1460, when he landed at
Sandwich with fifteen hundred men. In four days he was before the
walls of London, having marched in that time a distance of seventy
miles. According to some accounts, the common people so flocked to his
standard, that in those four days his force had swelled to forty
thousand. The city threw open its gates and joyfully welcomed him,
while Henry fled to the north. In the beginning of July the battle of
Northampton was fought. The Yorkists gained a complete victory, and
took Henry prisoner. Before the fight Warwick issued the command to
spare the common people but to slay the nobles, judging the quarrel to
be more especially theirs; and it is significant that throughout the
Wars of the Roses the proportion of leaders slain far exceeds that in
any other war.

Up to this time Warwick's conception of the war was merely the natural
struggle of the one party with the other for power, using as their
means the rude arguments of the time. He still maintained his loyalty
to King Henry, and when the Duke of York, after the battle of
Northampton, presented his claim to the throne Warwick opposed him,
and prevailed upon him to waive it till the death of the king. But
naturally such a state of things could not long endure. Warwick, while
respecting the person of the king, was fighting against his orders,
and so, while professing loyalty, was actually a rebel.

Soon the struggle blazed out anew, and in December, 1460, the Duke of
York was defeated and slain at Wakefield. Early in 1461 Warwick was
defeated in the second battle of St. Albans, but the royalists not
taking advantage of their victory, Edward, son of the Duke of York,
accompanied by Warwick, marched on London, and was proclaimed king as
Edward IV. Soon after the Yorkists gained a complete victory at Towton
(1461), the bloodiest field of the whole war. Nearly all the
Lancastrian chiefs were slain, Henry's cause was lost, and ere long he
was captured by Warwick and lodged in the Tower. The credit of the
crowning victory of Towton does not rest with Warwick alone, for he
had the help of young Edward, perhaps as great a military genius as
himself. Little is known of the details of the fighting, but we are
told that wherever the Earl of Warwick was, there the fight raged
hottest.

[Illustration: York and Lancaster--The White and Red Roses.]

The earl was now the greatest man in England. His extended connections
and immense possessions were joined to the most distinguished personal
qualities, intrepidity, decision, and all the military virtues,
eloquence and general talent, an affability and frankness of bearing
that captivated equally all classes, a boundless hospitality and
magnificence that enthroned him in the hearts of the commons. Wherever
he resided, we are told he kept open house, and the number of people
daily fed at his various mansions, when he was at the height of his
prosperity, exceeded thirty thousand. "When he came to London," says
Stowe in his "Chronicle," "he held such an house that six oxen were
eaten at a breakfast, and every tavern was full of his meat; for
who that had any acquaintance in that house he should have had as much
sodden and roast as he might carry upon a long dagger."

But now, when Warwick might have expected to reap the reward of his
labors, new troubles arose. King Edward began to feel jealous of his
power, his unique influence, and vast popularity. It is said that
Warwick was sent to France to arrange a treaty with Louis, and to
propose a marriage between Edward and his wife's sister. On his return
he found the king married to Elizabeth Woodville, daughter of Lord
Rivers, and an alliance made with the enemy of Louis, the Duke of
Burgundy. Edward now lavished all his kindness on the Woodvilles,
intending to use them as a counterfoil to the Nevilles, and for this
purpose he deprived the Nevilles of some of their posts. By a series
of deliberate insults Warwick was driven farther and farther away from
the king, till he was forced into open revolt.

In July, 1468, his forces defeated the royalists with great slaughter
at Edgecote, and a few days later he made Edward his prisoner. The
Lancastrians at once rose again in favor of the aged King Henry; but
Warwick, maintaining his allegiance to his royal captive, suppressed
all revolts with an iron hand, and, having received renewed pledges of
good faith, soon after restored Edward to his throne.

Two years later the king declared Warwick a rebel; and he was
compelled to flee to France. Louis XI. used his influence in bringing
Warwick and Margaret, wife of King Henry, together, and they agreed to
forget their differences in the face of a common enemy. Clarence, the
new king's brother, had previously married Warwick's daughter, and
joined his party.

Once more the king-maker landed in England and advanced on London.
Edward fled to Holland and Henry was again placed upon the throne. But
ere long Edward secretly landed in England, raised an army, not
without difficulty, and met Warwick at Barnet. The faithless Clarence
had in the meantime deserted Warwick and joined his brother's army.
The army of Warwick was composed of strangely different elements--old
enemies fighting side by side as friends. The battle was lost mainly
through a grievous blunder. In the heavy mist which hung around, the
party of the Earl of Oxford were mistaken for the enemy and were
attacked by their own friends. The cry of treachery was raised, and
the whole army broke into utter rout. Warwick resisted till all hope
was gone. He had fought on foot throughout the battle, and his heavy
armor did not suffer him to escape. He was surrounded and slain,
fighting manfully, April 14, 1471.

Thus fell on the field of battle Richard, Earl of Warwick, in the
prime of his life, after sixteen years of deep intrigue and desperate
fighting. Had he been born in a more peaceful time he would have been
a great statesman, and have done much for the good of his country, for
his talents were more political than military, and almost alone among
the self-seeking rivals of the time, he shows something of the
instincts of patriotism. Cast as he was in the troublous times of the
Wars of the Roses, he stands out in character and genius above all
those of his generation. He was the best beloved man in the kingdom.
When he was away from England, says Hall, the common people thought
the sun had gone out of the heavens. His personality cast a charm over
even Louis XI. The heart of the Yorkist party, he was true to its
cause till he found that his service was no longer desired. He was not
the man to sit quietly under insult, and when it came from King
Edward, who owed all that he was to him, it was more than he could
endure. Yet it was only when he found his every project thwarted, and
especially those that were dearest to his heart, that he was driven
into open warfare with the king. His treason is capable of much
justification: he cannot be accused of forsaking his master. He had in
him the making of a great king, and how great and useful might have
been his career had fortune placed him over the councils of a Charles
VII. or a Henry VI.! As it is, he stands in worth and character far
above any of his time, a figure that commands not merely admiration
but affection.




HERNANDO CORTES[17]

By H. RIDER HAGGARD

(1485-1547)

         [Footnote 17: Copyright, 1894, by Selmar Hess.]

[Illustration: Hernando Cortes. [TN]]


Among the millions that from age to age are born into this world there
arise in every generation one or two pre-eminent men and women who are
objects of the wonder and the envy, the admiration and the hatred of
their contemporaries, and whose names, after their deaths, stand out
as landmarks by which we shape a course across the dark and doubtful
seas of history. Cæsar and Cromwell, Mahomet and Napoleon, to mention
no others, were such men, and such a man was Hernando Cortes, the
conqueror of Mexico. They have been called, and well called, Men of
Destiny, since it is impossible in studying their lives and tracing
their vast influence upon human affairs, to avoid the conclusion that
they were raised up and endowed with great talents and opportunities
in order that by their agency the ends of Providence might be shaped.

Hernando Cortes was born of a good family, at the town of Medellin in
Spain, in 1485, and educated at the college of Salamanca. At the age
of nineteen having proved himself unfit to follow the profession of
the law to which his parents had destined him, he emigrated to the
Indian Island of Hispaniola where he was appointed notary of the town
of Acua, and in 1511 assisted in the conquest of Cuba under the
command of Velasquez. Here after many curious adventures and
vacillations he married a lady named Catalina Xuarez, and being
created _alcade_ of the settlement of St. Jago realized a moderate
fortune by the practice of agriculture and mining. In 1518 there came
to Cuba news of the discoveries made by Grijalva in Yucatan on the
coast of the country now known as Mexico, and the Governor, Velasquez,
determined to despatch a force to explore this new land. After much
intriguing and in consideration of the payment of a considerable sum
of money toward the expenses, Cortes whose ambitious spirit had
already wearied of a life of peace and indolence, contrived to
persuade Velasquez to appoint him Captain General of the expedition.
Before the ships sailed, however, Velasquez repented him of the
appointment, for in Cortes he recognized a servant who might well
become his master, and made arrangements to invest some other hidalgo
with the leadership of the expedition. Now it was that Cortes showed
what manner of man he was. Many in his position on learning the wishes
of their superior would have tamely yielded up their posts. Not so
Cortes, who on the first hint that he was to be deprived of his
authority, collected his men, and all unprepared as was his squadron,
weighed anchor while the governor slept. At the town of Trinidad he
landed to collect stores and volunteers, treating with contempt the
orders that reached the commander of the town from Velasquez to depose
him from his command and detain his person. Here it was that Cortes
made his famous address to the volunteers, wherein he shows that
although his instructions were to undertake a trading voyage and
acquire information of the country, his real aim was far different,
since he promises unimagined wealth to those who are true to him, and
by a curious flash of prescience prophesies immortal renown to their
enterprise. On February 10, 1519, he sailed to the conquest of Mexico,
accompanied by some six hundred and fifty white men and a few Indians.
Cortes was in his thirty-fourth year when he entered on this the
greatest of his enterprises. He was pale faced and dark eyed, somewhat
slender in build, but of an iron strength and constitution. In temper
he was patient though liable to fits of passion, and in disposition
frank, merry, and generous, but most determined. He dressed richly and
was constant in his religious exercises. Such was the great captain, a
man suited by circumstances and nature to the desperate undertaking
which it was his destiny to bring to a successful issue.

Having touched at the island of Cozumel on the coast of Yucatan,
Cortes sailed up the Tabasco River and began his work of conquest by
attacking a great army of Indians in the neighborhood of that town.
For a while the natives held their own notwithstanding their dismay at
the sound and effects of fire-arms; but the appearance of the
horsemen, whom they took to be strange animals, caused them to flee in
terror leaving many hundreds of their warriors dead upon the field. On
the morrow they made their submission, bringing women and other gifts
as a peace-offering. Among these women was one named Malinche, or by
the Spaniards Marina, whom Cortes took as a mistress and who is
described by Camargo as having been "beautiful as a goddess." It was
this lady, born to be the evil genius of her country, who instructed
her lord and master in the habits, traditions, and history of the
Aztecs, and of the land of Anahuac which they inhabited together with
other tribes. She was Cortes' interpreter and confidante, whose
business it was to gain information from the Indians, which he could
use, and whose wit and devotion more than once saved him from
disaster. So invaluable were her services to Cortes that it is
doubtful if without her aid he would have succeeded in conquering
Mexico, and it was from her that he acquired the name of Malinche by
which he was known among the Indian races. Her reward, when she had
served his purpose and he was weary of her, was to be given by him in
marriage to another man.

Leaving Tabasco Cortes sailed along the coast till he reached the spot
where the city of Vera Cruz now stands, whence he opened
communications with Montezuma, Emperor of the Aztecs. In due course
envoys arrived from the monarch laden with magnificent gifts, who
delivered a civil but none the less peremptory message requesting the
Spaniards to return whence they came. By this time Cortes had learned
that although the Aztecs were the greatest power in Anahuac, their
supremacy was not acknowledged by all the tribes; notably was it
contested by the Tlascalans and their allies the Otomies. The
Tlascalans were republicans having their home in the mountains almost
midway between Mexico and the coast. For fifty years or more they had
been at bitter enmity with the Aztecs, who again and again had vainly
attempted to subjugate them. To this people Cortes despatched an
embassy asking for a safe passage through their territories on his
road to Mexico, for his political insight told him that they might
prove valuable allies. No answer was returned by the Tlascalans who
when the Spaniards advanced attacked them furiously, only to be
defeated by Cortes in several engagements, till, discouraged and
believing the white men to be invincible, they sued for peace, and
from enemies were converted into firm allies. From Tlascala the
Spaniards proceeded to the neighboring city of Cholula where Marina
discovered a plot to put them to death. For this offence Cortes took a
terrible vengeance. Falling on the inhabitants of the city when they
were unprepared he butchered vast numbers of them, giving their houses
and temples to sack. Having thus established the terror of his name he
marched on to Mexico accompanied by a body of about five thousand
Tlascalan allies. Meanwhile the counsels of the Aztecs were darkened
with doubt. The Spaniards might easily have been kept out of Mexico by
force, but the arm of Montezuma was paralyzed by superstitious fears.
Prophecy foretold that the children of the white god Quetzalcoatl
should rise from the sea to possess the land, and in the Spaniards he
beheld the fate fulfilled. To him they were not mortal but divine and
when diplomacy had failed to keep them at a distance he feared to lift
a sword against them. Thus it came about that without a blow being
struck to drive them back Cortes and his little band of adventurers
found themselves established at the heart of the strange and rich
civilization that they had discovered, not as enemies, but as the
guests of the king. They were not slow to avail themselves of the
opportunities of their position in order to advance their ends which
were, first plunder, secondly conquest, and, thirdly the extension of
the authority of Spain and of the Christian religion. In pursuit of
these ends upon some slight pretext Cortes seized the person of
Montezuma, the great emperor, and imprisoned him in one of his own
palaces whence, however, he was still allowed to direct the government
and issue his commands.

Meanwhile reports of Cortes' doings and success had reached Velasquez
the Governor of Cuba, who determined to despatch an expedition to
conquer or capture him as a traitor. Accordingly eighteen vessels
containing nearly a thousand white men were placed under the command
of Panfilo de Narvaez, and reached Vera Cruz in April, 1520. When
Cortes heard of the arrival of this armament and its object which was
to punish him for his supposed rebellion, he marched from Mexico,
leaving the little garrison and the person of Montezuma in charge of
his comrade Alvarado. Although he had with him but two hundred and
fifty men in all, he did not hesitate to hazard a night attack upon
Narvaez who was strongly encamped at Cempoalla. It was completely
successful; Narvaez was wounded, captured, and sent in chains to Vera
Cruz, while the army that had come to conquer him swore allegiance to
Cortes as Captain-General and marched with him back to Mexico. Here
great events were in progress. Moved to the deed by fear or by the
discovery of some real or fancied plot against the Spaniards,
Alvarado, the deputy of Cortes, had fallen upon the unarmed Aztec
nobles while they were celebrating a feast in the courtyard of the
great temple, and butchered some six hundred of them with every
circumstance of brutality. Then at last the patient Aztecs rose and
until the womanly Montezuma begged them to desist, attacked the palace
where the Spaniards were quartered, with fury. At the intervention of
their monarch the attack was turned to a blockade and Cortes arrived
from his victory over Narvaez to find his companions in desperate
straits. Reinforced by fresh soldiers the Spaniards carried on the war
with activity. They assaulted and captured the great pyramid, putting
to the sword the priests of human sacrifice and burning the
blood-stained temples of the gods. Also they made several sallies into
the city and repelled onslaughts upon the palace. It was in the course
of one of these attacks that Montezuma received the wound that brought
about his death. Mounting the central tower of the palace he implored
his subjects to cease from attacking his friends the Spaniards,
whereupon in their fury they overwhelmed him with a shower of darts
and stones, inflicting injuries from which in course of a few days he
died. Surrounded as he was on every side by thousands of fierce
enemies determined to stretch every Spaniard upon the stone of
sacrifice, Cortes saw the impossibility of maintaining the unequal
fight and determined on retreat. Accordingly on the night of July 1,
1520, the Spaniards and their native allies sallied from the fortress,
and laden with gold from Montezuma's treasury, took the route of
Tlacopan. Soon their escape was detected and instantly a fierce attack
was made upon them from every quarter. The bridge that they had
brought with them to span the gaps in the causeway became fixed in the
mud, so that their only path across the canals lay over the bodies of
their comrades. At length they won through, but out of their small
force there had perished, or been taken captive as victims for
sacrifice, some four hundred and fifty Spaniards and four thousand
native allies. It is said that when the shattered army reached a place
of safety outside the city, Cortes sat down beneath an ancient
cedar-tree which is still shown to travellers, and wept. Yet within a
week fortune smiled on him again, for he and the few comrades who
remained to him fought and won the battle of Otompan against thousands
of the Indians, Cortes killing their chief Cihuaca with his own hand.

The Aztecs rejoiced at the departure of the Spaniards from their
capital Mexico or Tenoctitlan, but their joy was premature. First the
small-pox, introduced into the country by the white men, fell upon the
city and swept away thousands, among them Cuitlahua, the emperor who
succeeded to Montezuma, and then came the news that the indomitable
Cortes was marching upon them with a great army of native allies and
large reinforcements of Spaniards from overseas. Guatimozin, the new
emperor, made every possible preparation for defence and the siege
began, a siege as cruel as that of Jerusalem and perhaps more bloody.
First Cortes laid waste the cities about Mexico, then he attacked the
Queen of the Valley herself--attacked it again and again till at
length it was a ruin and tens of thousands of its inhabitants were
dead by starvation, by pestilence, and by the sword. On either side
the combat was one of desperate courage, but notwithstanding
occasional successes on the part of the Aztecs, such as that when they
captured and sacrificed some sixty Spaniards, from the first the
genius of Cortes made the end inevitable. When nothing remained of
Tenoctitlan and its people save some blackened walls and a few
thousand wretches reduced to skeletons by hunger, the capture of
Guatimozin while attempting to escape in a canoe, made an end of the
fighting in August, 1521. Cortes promised honorable treatment to the
fallen king, but before long he put him and some of his companions to
the torture in order to force the discovery of hidden treasure. This
brutality proved ineffectual, but taken together with the subsequent
hanging of Guatimozin upon an unproved charge of conspiracy against
the Spaniards, it constitutes the blackest blot upon the fame of
Cortes. It is fair to add, however, that he was not by nature a harsh
man, and that he was driven to the commission of these cruelties by
the clamor of his soldiers who were infuriated at finding so little
treasure in the devastated city. With the capture of Mexico the
fortunes of Cortes culminated. He was appointed Captain-General of the
land of New Spain in October, 1522, and the next few years he occupied
in rebuilding the city, and in bringing the surrounding territories
under the rule of Spain. Wearying of these comparatively peaceful
occupations, in 1524 he undertook an expedition of discovery and
conquest to Honduras, upon which he was absent until May, 1526, when
he returned after enduring much hardship and suffering, to find that
enemies had been plotting against him in Mexico. This discovery and
the desire of clearing himself with the emperor, caused him to
determine to visit Spain where he arrived in May, 1528. Charles the
Fifth received him with much favor creating him Marquis of the Valley
of Oaxaca and military commander of New Spain, and endowing him with
vast estates in the lands that he had conquered. In 1530 he returned
to Mexico accompanied by his second wife, a lady of good family whom
he had married while in Spain. Very soon he entered on a course of
expeditions of discovery and maritime adventures which involved him in
great pecuniary losses and a quarrel with the viceroy Mendoza; and in
1540 he sailed a second time for Spain to obtain redress from the
emperor. But Cortes was no longer the power that he had been; his
youth was gone and his work was done, therefore his prayers and
remonstrances were treated with cold neglect. For nearly four years he
pressed his suit and in February, 1544, we find him writing a letter
to the emperor begging him to direct the Council of the Indies to come
to a decision upon it. This letter in which pathetically enough, he
speaks of himself as "old and poor and indebted," produced no result
and once again, worn out and bitterly disappointed, its writer turned
his face toward the land that he had won for Spain. But he was never
to behold it more. At Seville he was seized with dysentery and passed
away December 2, 1547, being then in his sixty-third year. His body
was taken to Mexico for burial.

In Hernando Cortes died one of the great men of the world, though how
much of his greatness was due to chance is difficult to determine. It
is certain that again and again fortune stood his friend in a manner
that was little short of miraculous, as in the instances of the
unexpected victory over Narvaez and of the death of the general at the
battle of Otampan. But if chance or fate gave him opportunities it was
Cortes' own genius and unconquerable will that enabled him to avail
himself of them. These qualities were the most striking
characteristics of the man. He showed them when having determined on
the conquest of Mexico he burnt his ships that there might be no
escape from the decision; when he hit upon the expedient of using
rival tribes to accomplish the overthrow of the Aztecs; when, driven
from Mexico with the loss of the half of his army he returned to the
attack; and in many another time and place. He had great good
qualities, he was a true friend, and according to his lights, an
honorable and even a religious man, and his faults were those of his
time and training, or at worst such as are not inconsistent with a
generous nature. His cruelties may be urged against him, but no
Spaniard of his age thought it cruel to slaughter enemies of the Faith
who practised human sacrifice; also having once embarked upon his
colossal undertaking he and his companions must either slay or be
slain. There is evidence to show that personally he was not a cruel
man. Thus when called upon to sign the death-warrant of a soldier he
lamented that he had ever been taught to write, and there are passages
in his will which show his conscience to have been troubled by
questions as to the right to enslave human beings. With a handful of
followers Cortes overthrew the fabric of the Aztec Empire, broke the
spirit of its people so effectually that to this day it has not
recovered itself, and swept away its religion. Whether for good or
evil this was a stupendous achievement and one that must make his name
immortal.

[Signature of the author.]




FRANCISCO PIZARRO[18]

By J. T. TROWBRIDGE

(1471-1541)

         [Footnote 18: Copyright, 1894, by Selmar Hess.]

[Illustration: Francisco Pizarro. [TN]]


The old Spanish province of Estremadura, though distant from the sea,
shut in by mountain-chains, furnished numerous adventurers for the
expeditions of discovery, conquest, and plunder that followed Columbus
to the New World; two of whom achieved astonishing renown. One was the
conqueror of Mexico; the other, the conqueror of Peru.

Of the early life of Francisco Pizarro not much is known with
certainty. He was born about the year 1471; but even that date is a
matter of conjecture, so little care was had of the coming into the
world of the actor who was to play so stirring a part in it. The
family from which he inherited his name must have been one of some
note in its day. His kinsman and great rival in fame, Cortes, was a
Pizarro on his mother's side.

Francisco was the second of four brothers, all of whom were men of
ability and valor, and all of whom fought in the Peruvian wars. Their
father was Colonel Gonzalo Pizarro, concerning whom little is known,
save that he was a soldier of Spain, and that he served creditably in
Italy and Navarre.

The mother of Francisco was Francisca Gonzales, a woman of low
condition, from whom he seems to have received hardly more parental
care than from his father, by whom he was utterly neglected. The story
told by Gomara, and quoted by Prescott, that, abandoned as a
foundling, he was nursed by a sow, though as mythical as that of
Romulus and the wolf, which probably suggested it, indicates
nevertheless the degradation of his childhood. He grew up in ignorance
and vagabondage. Of what the world calls education he had not the
first rudiments; to the day of his death he could neither read nor
write. The only occupation in which we hear of his being engaged in
his boyhood, was that of a swineherd.

At what age he escaped from this mean employment is not known. The
claim set up for him by his descendants, that he served with his
father in Italy, hardly deserves consideration. He was about
twenty-one years old when all Spain began to ring with the discoveries
of Columbus and his companions beyond the western seas. Pizarro left
his employer and his pigs, ran away to Seville, and embarked in one of
the early expeditions that sailed from that port to the New World.

Of his years of apprenticeship in the stern warfare of the times we
have no trustworthy details, until at Hispaniola, in 1510, he joined,
as second in command, Ojeda's disastrous expedition to Uraba, on the
main coast. Sanguinary fights with swarms of savages armed with
poisoned arrows, marked the fortunes of the adventurers. And when
Ojeda returned to the islands for assistance, which he did not bring,
Pizarro remained in command of the starving colony, amid hardships and
horrors from which only his resolute daring brought off a remnant
alive.

He was with Balboa in his famous march across the mountains to the
Pacific, which no European eyes had hitherto beheld; and shared with
him the joy of that discovery, which Keats wrongly ascribes to Cortes,
when the hardy band, first beholding the unknown ocean outspread
before them--

  "Looked at each other with a wild surmise,
   Silent, upon a peak in Darien."

He remained with Balboa on the isthmus until the death of that valiant
commander, when he united his fortunes with those of the governor,
Pedrarias, and headed various expeditions along the Pacific coast and
to the islands beyond, in quest of pearls and gold. He was occupied in
this way, or in cultivating with the aid of Indian slaves a malarious
tract of land he had acquired near Panama, when a new career invited
him.

Rumors of a rich empire far to the south, where gold was as common
with the natives as iron was with the Spaniards, had long inflamed the
imaginations of the colonists; then news came of the prodigious
exploits of Cortes in Mexico. Pizarro burned to emulate his kinsman.
Having formed a partnership with Diego de Almagro, a soldier of
experience, and Hernando de Luque, a priest supplied with worldly
means, he secured an old vessel that had been designed by Balboa for a
similar expedition, refitted it with Luque's money, and with a hundred
adventurers sailed from the port of Panama in November, 1524; leaving
Almagro to follow in a smaller vessel.

Pizarro was then more than fifty years old, but still in possession of
all his masterful qualities. And he had need of all, amid the perils
of sea and land, the tempests, swamps, battles, sickness, and famine,
which rendered his first voyage down the coast a deplorable failure.
Almagro met with no better success. Both returned to the isthmus
buffeted, baffled, humiliated, but too stout of heart to be cast down.
They brought back but little gold, but with that little they had
gathered evidence of the indubitable existence of the opulent empire
they sought.

The governor was hugely dissatisfied with the results of the
expedition, of which he had expected to share some of the profits; and
his consent to another could hardly have been obtained, but for the
persuasive eloquence of the priest, backed by the offer of a sum in
ready cash. For a thousand pesos de oro Pedrarias gave his consent,
and signed away his right to the spoils of an empire.

A new contract was entered into by the three partners, and an
elaborate and solemn document was drawn up, in sonorous Spanish, which
is curious reading at this day. Father Luque signed it with his own
hand, and the two soldiers by the hands of witnesses, since neither
Pizarro nor Almagro could write his name. About one hundred and sixty
men were enlisted, and again the two chiefs set sail from Panama in
separate ships.

They made their first landing at the mouth of the Rio San Juan, where
by the plunder of a small village, they secured some ornaments of gold
and a few prisoners. Almagro hastened to carry the treasure back to
Panama, as a bait to other followers, while Pizarro and his pilot Ruiz
remained to explore the interior and the coast. Ruiz sailed as far
south as the equator, and after a memorable voyage of some weeks,
returned to his chief with a cheering report. He had fallen in with
what seemed at first a ship at sea, where no European ship had ever
been, and found it to be an Indian _balsa_, a huge raft across which
was stretched a sail of cotton-cloth. It had a rudder and a keel. On
board were men and women clad in a curious sort of woollen stuff,
skilfully woven, and beautifully dyed and embroidered. They were
making a voyage of traffic along the coast. They wore ornaments of
gold, and had with them, besides vessels and mirrors of burnished
silver, balances for weighing the precious metals, which by signs they
assured Ruiz were common in their country.

Pizarro in the meanwhile vainly endeavored to pass the yawning gorges,
bottomless swamps, and dense dark forests that lay between him and the
snow-covered peaks of the Cordilleras. Entangled vines and trees of a
luxuriant tropical vegetation, huge boas coiling in the branches,
ready to spring upon their prey, screaming parrots, chattering and
grimacing monkeys, mosquitoes, alligators, prowling savages,--amid
such scenes as these he and his band had once more confronted famine
and death in the absence of Almagro and Ruiz.

Ruiz came opportunely with his good news, and Almagro returned with
eighty recruits. The expedition re-embarked and proceeded southward.
The aspect of the coast became more inviting as they advanced. There
were signs of an extensive civilization; fields cultivated with maize,
cacao, and potatoes; many villages; and at length a town of more than
two thousand houses, laid out with streets, and thronging with
inhabitants. Among the Spaniards wild enthusiasm prevailed. But it was
quickly checked by the hostile demonstrations with which they were
met, when they attempted to gain a foothold on the soil of the Incas.
It was useless to make front against such numbers as opposed them.
Divided counsels and a violent quarrel between the two captains
ensued, and the expedition sailed back northward. Once more Almagro
returned to Panama for more men, while Pizarro and his followers
remained to starve on the barren isle of Gallo.

[Illustration: Pizarro exhorting his band at Gallo.]

Instead of permitting any more of his people to depart on what seemed
so foolhardy and fatal a business, Rios, the new governor of Panama,
despatched to the island two vessels, under a commander named Tafur,
with orders to bring away every Spaniard left alive there. Then
occurred the famous episode that decided so dramatically the
fortunes of Pizarro and the fate of Peru. Tafur had brought supplies
of provisions to the famished and emaciated, but now jubilant
soldiers; and all except Pizarro appeared eager to abandon their
barren adventure and return in the ships. Pizarro alone refused
obedience to the governor's agent. Drawing a line on the sand with his
sword, he cried: "Comrades! on that side lie hunger and hardship; on
this side, ease and safety. There lies Peru with its riches; here,
Panama and poverty. Choose, every man for himself, like brave
Castilians. For me, I go to the south."

He stepped across the line. There was a minute of dismay and silence.
Then Ruiz followed, and after him twelve others went over, an act of
as desperate and resolute courage as ever inspired a forlorn band.

They saw the ships containing their comrades sail away without them;
Ruiz also returned, pledged to bring assistance to his companions left
behind; while Pizarro remained with his twelve Spaniards, and three or
four Indian captives whom he had made friends, on the desolate island.

Not even a ship was left them, and they had to build a raft to convey
them to a less inhospitable island, that of Gorgona, farther north.
There they lived seven months, subsisting on small game brought down
by their cross-bows, and shell-fish found on the shores, until Ruiz,
after weary delays, returned in a small vessel, bringing supplies, but
not the expected reinforcement of troops.

In this frail craft the dauntless rovers put to sea. Pizarro pursued
his explorations southward, beyond the point where he afterward
founded Truxillo, named after his native town; visited several
Peruvian ports, and learned much of the country he proposed to
subjugate. He then returned to Panama, which he reached after an
absence of eighteen months. The reappearance of the little group of
wanderers bringing news of their discoveries, was the cause of great
astonishment in the colony, and of joyful enthusiasm among their
friends, who had long given them up for dead.

The governor, however, resenting Pizarro's disobedience of his orders
at the isle of Gallo, refused to sanction another expedition; and
Pizarro resolved upon the bold course of returning to Spain and
appealing to the Crown. This was in the spring of 1528.

Arriving at Seville, he was immediately thrown into prison for a debt
incurred at Darien. But he was released by order of the emperor,
Charles V., who received him graciously at Toledo, heard the wondrous
story of his wanderings, which Pizarro knew how to tell, and saw the
vessels of gold and silver, the fine fabrics, the llamas, and other
evidences of the Peruvian civilization, which were displayed before
his royal eyes. He was also, no doubt influenced by the recent
achievements of Cortes, who was then at court, and who perhaps spoke
for his kinsman a friendly word.

The monarch turned over Pizarro and his enterprise, with his
recommendation, to the Council of the Indies. Yet a year passed, and
nothing was done. Pizarro was fast sinking into obscurity, and he
would likewise have sunk into despair, if he had been less stout of
heart. Then, as Queen Isabella had aided Columbus, so the queen of
Charles V. came to the assistance of Pizarro, and caused to be
executed the extraordinary instrument which bestowed on him, with the
rights of discovery and conquest, the titles of Governor and
Captain-General of New Castile, as Peru was then called, and a salary
of 725,000 maravedis, to be drawn however from the conquered country.
Almagro and Luque were also provided for, but in a more modest way,
which proved the beginning of a long, bitter, and deadly feud between
Almagro and his chief. Nor did the instrument fail to make the usual
provision for the conversion to Christianity of the nations to be
subjugated and plundered.

In mustering his recruits Pizarro had the satisfaction of revisiting
his native town of Truxillo, where he had lived in degradation, and to
which he now returned a renowned discoverer and soldier, and a titled
magnate. There he found his three brothers, the Pizarros, all poor and
proud and eager for adventure; and a fourth brother, on his mother's
side. With these and other followers, hardly exceeding one hundred, he
sailed from Seville, in January, 1530; and a year later, namely, in
January, 1531, after a solemn consecration of his enterprise in the
cathedral of Panama, he put forth from that port with one hundred and
eighty men and twenty-seven horses, on his fourth, last, and finally
successful expedition, to overthrow a populous empire.

That empire lay in the bosom and on both sides of the mighty ranges of
the Andes, occupying thirty-seven degrees of the coast south of the
equator, and extending eastward far over the valleys of the Amazon and
its numerous tributaries. It was under the rule of the Incas, a
parental despotism, which spread an iron network of laws over millions
of subjects of different races and languages. Its mountain slopes,
table-lands, sea-coasts, and plains comprised every variety of climate
and almost every diversity of physical features. Its capital was
Cuzco, where dwelt the adored Incas; there also was the famous Temple
of the Sun, with its gorgeous decorations of gold and gems. Canals,
aqueducts, complete systems of irrigation for the rainless regions;
magnificent mountain roads, built to endure for centuries; fine
textile fabrics, utensils of clay and copper, vessels and ornaments of
silver and gold; bridges, fortresses, and edifices of a rude but massy
and symmetrical architecture, well adapted to the climate and the
needs of the inhabitants; armies, magistrates, courts of
justice,--such were some of the tokens of a wide semi-civilized
prosperity, which less than two hundred Spanish adventurers were
proceeding ruthlessly to destroy.

With incredible difficulties still to overcome, Pizarro had in his
favor a circumstance of immense importance. The country was at that
time distracted by civil war. Two brothers, Huascar and Atahualpa,
sons of the last Inca, were engaged in a fratricidal strife for the
imperial power, and their armies were turned against each other.

Pizarro resolved to strike his first blow at Tumbez; but was
constrained by baffling winds to put into the Bay St. Matthew. There
he landed his force, and soon fell upon a peaceful village, putting
the inhabitants to flight and pillaging their dwellings. A
considerable treasure thus obtained was sent back to Panama, where it
had the desired effect of rallying new recruits for the conquest. A
most welcome reinforcement was headed by Hernando de Soto, afterwards
famed as the discoverer of the Mississippi, who sailed to join Pizarro
with one hundred men and a number of horses.

De Soto arrived in time to aid in extricating him from a harassing
situation on the island of Puna. Pizarro had been so indiscreet as to
get into a quarrel with the inhabitants, whom he had defeated in
battle and slaughtered in large numbers, and from whose incessant
attacks he was suffering great annoyance.

He now felt himself strong enough to invade the interior. The story of
that invasion is one of the most astonishing in history. It has been
many times told, but nowhere else so effectively as in the full,
flowing, and lucid narrative of Prescott. It can be but briefly
sketched here.

Having established near the sea-coast a settlement which he named San
Miguel, to serve as a key of communication between him and his ships,
Pizarro set out boldly on his march, having with him but one hundred
and seventy-seven men, nine of whom showing signs of sinking courage,
were soon sent back to the settlement. By pretences of a friendly
mission to their Inca, he won his way among such of the surprised
inhabitants as were not frightened from their villages by his
approach; and penetrated the wild defiles of the Cordilleras, behind
which, near Caxamalca--now Caxamarca--the Inca Atahualpa, with an
immense army lay encamped. He was fresh from a great and decisive
victory over his elder brother, and was resting, and enjoying the warm
baths near the city,--the "baths of the Incas," as they are called to
this day.

Instead of disputing the passage of the strangers in the mountain
fortresses, and hurling destruction upon them from a thousand crags,
the monarch sent to exchange gifts with them, and assurances of
friendship; and awaited them in his camp, the pavilions of which
whitened the wide hillsides for miles.

On a dull afternoon in November, 1532, Pizarro entered Caxamalca, and
undismayed by the innumerable host that confronted him, went to pay a
visit of courtesy to the Inca. He was gloomily received by Atahualpa,
who chanced to be observing a fast, but who promised to return his
visit on the following day.

Pizarro felt that a crisis in his audacious business was close at
hand; and endured the deepest anxiety until late the next afternoon,
that of November 16th, when, after long delays and apparent waverings
on the part of the Inca, which severely tried the patience of the
Spaniards lying in wait with their heavy armor on, he at length
appeared, borne in a gorgeous palanquin, and accompanied by an immense
and magnificent procession.

With ferocious satisfaction Pizarro beheld his august victim advancing
to his doom. The procession entered the grand plaza of Caxamalca, on
three sides of which, under cover of low buildings opening into it,
spearmen and horsemen stood to their arms. Not a Spaniard was to be
seen, until a priest with interpreters advanced to meet the monarch,
and to confuse him with an astonishing harangue concerning the true
faith and the supremacy of Spain. Pizarro saw that his opportunity
had come. He waved his scarf; from the fortress sounded a signal-gun;
and with fierce battle-cries the Spaniards rushed from all sides upon
the Peruvians.

The shouts, the blaze and smoke of fire-arms, the terrible
detonations, the sight of plunging horses and their riders, with the
sudden fury of the onset, paralyzed with terror the multitude of
unarmed attendants, who fell the victims of a horrible massacre. The
Inca was seized and borne off a captive. And yet the pursuit and
slaughter did not cease until thousands of the panic-stricken and
defenceless Peruvians had been slain, and more prisoners had been
taken than were required to provide every Spaniard with a retinue of
servants.

Pizarro treated his captive with the consideration due to a great but
fallen potentate; he granted him ample apartments, and the society of
his favorite wives and nobles. He at the same time endeavored to save
his soul, by enforcing upon his mind the truths of the Catholic faith.
Atahualpa accepted with dignity the fortunes of war; and as a ransom
offered to fill a large room in which he one day was, with vessels of
gold, as high as he could reach. Pizarro agreed to the proposal, and
by the Inca's orders messengers were despatched to Cuzco and other
important cities of the empire, for the required booty.

This arrangement reached the ears of Huascar, then a prisoner in the
hands of his younger brother's adherents; he thereupon sent word to
the Spaniards that he would pay a much larger reward if they would
espouse his cause and set him free. Unfortunately for both him and
Pizarro, the offer reached the ears of Atahualpa, who secretly caused
Huascar to be put to death.

The golden treasure soon began to come in, borne on the backs of
Indians,--goblets, vases, salvers, massy plates and tiles from the
walls of palaces and temples, and images of plants and animals. Some
of these objects weighed individually several pounds; and the art
displayed in their manufacture was often admirable. But they were all
ruthlessly melted down into ingots, to be divided among the
conquerors. Gold to the value of more than seventeen million dollars,
measured by our modern standard, was thus secured, besides a vast
amount of silver. Certainly no prince in all the world's history had
ever paid such a ransom.

The treasure was a long while coming in; and Pizarro had ample time to
consider how he should keep his part of the contract. He could never
have had any intention of giving the Inca his liberty; nor was he deep
enough in his craft to perceive the immense advantage he might gain by
holding him a captive. He resolved upon his death. The unhappy prince
was tried by a military court of his enemies, charged with the
usurpation of the empire, with the murder of his brother, and with
attempts to incite an insurrection against the Spaniards. He was
condemned, received as a convert to the Catholic faith, baptized, and
executed. This event occurred August 29, 1533.

Meanwhile Almagro had arrived with a much-needed reinforcement; and
adventurers of all sorts, from Spain and her western colonies, soon
began to flock to the newly opened land of gold. Pizarro marched upon
Cuzco, which he took after a fierce battle, and pillaged of what gold
had not been already removed for Atahualpa's ransom. He caused Manco
Capae, a young prince of the royal blood, to be proclaimed Inca; drove
him by his oppressions to revolt; and was besieged by him in Cuzco.
The Peruvians assaulted the city in countless numbers, set fire to the
houses with flaming arrows and red-hot stones, and might have starved
or destroyed the Spaniards, had not they themselves been forced by
starvation to raise the siege.

In June, 1538, the old feud between Pizarro and Almagro culminated in
a battle between their two factions, and Almagro was defeated and
killed. Pizarro now ruled the country with red-handed despotism. The
benignant laws of the Incas were replaced by the rapine of the
conquerors. Not only gold and silver, but the land itself and its
former peaceful occupants, were apportioned among them; and slavery
and concubinage prevailed in their most revolting forms. The rumors of
these wrongs reached Spain, and a commissioner was sent out to inquire
into them; but before his arrival Pizarro died by violence in his own
Ciudad de los Reyes, "City of the Kings,"--now Lima,--which he had
founded in 1535.

His death was worthy of his life. Attacked in his own house by the
avengers of Almagro, he fought furiously, and cut down three of his
assailants; but fell, overcome by numbers, and pierced by as many
blades as met in the body of Cæsar. His last word was "Jesu!" and his
last act, to stoop and kiss the symbol of a cross which he traced with
his finger on the bloody floor.

Thus lived and died one of the most extraordinary men of his time,
indeed of all times. It is hard to sum up briefly the good and evil of
such a character. He was said to be of a pleasing and dignified
presence, simple and self-reliant. We know that he was possessed of
indomitable courage, endurance, and persistency of purpose;
avaricious, perfidious, devout; and conspicuous for his cruelty even
in a cruel age. Greedy as he was of gold, he spent little of it upon
himself, and seemed to desire it chiefly for the power and honor it
would command. He founded settlements and cities, and was lavish in
his expenditures upon public works; no doubt ambitious of building up
a new empire on the ruins of the one he had destroyed. But he
exhibited none of the great qualities of a born ruler and lawgiver; in
the coarseness of his moral nature, a swineherd to the last. He never
married, but by a daughter of Atahualpa he had a daughter, who
survived him. In his native town of Truxillo her descendants are still
to be found, with the mingled blood of the conqueror and of the last
of the Incas in their veins.

[Signature of the author.]




GASPARD DE COLIGNI

By PROFESSOR CREASY

(1517-1572)

[Illustration: Burning of a house. [TN]]


There was a time, when the doctrines of the Reformation seemed
destined to achieve far ampler conquests over the dominion of Papal
Rome than they have ultimately realized. France, in particular, at the
commencement of the second half of the sixteenth century, appeared to
be almost won over to Protestantism. The Huguenots (as the followers
of the Reformed Faith in that country were termed) formed the most
influential, if not the largest part of the population of many of the
principal provinces, and of nearly all the provincial capitals; they
were numerous in Paris; nor was there a single district or town in
France in which they had not obtained converts and power, before the
war of 1562.

The history of the Reformation in France is a mournful one; but it
presents names to our notice which every good heart must delight to
honor; and foremost of these is the name of Gaspard de Coligni, the
statesman, the soldier, and the saint; who long was the stoutest
champion of the Protestant cause, and finally became the most glorious
of its many martyrs. Unlike his comrade Condé, he was proof against
the vicious blandishments of the enemy's court, as well as against the
terrors of their camps. Familiar with defeat, he never learned
despair. Hallam has well compared his indomitable energy to the

  "Atrocem animam Catonis;"

but the Huguenot chief, while fully equal to the ancient Roman in
probity, in self-reliance, and in unflinching fortitude, was far
superior to him in comprehensiveness of judgment and in fertility of
resources; and moreover, the affectionate gentleness which marked the
private life of Coligni, contrasts favorably with the stoic coarseness
by which the character of Cato was deformed.

The father of Coligni was head of an ancient and noble house, and was
the seigneur of Châtillon-sur-Lion. At his death, in 1522, he left
three sons, then of tender years, all of whom became eminent in French
history, and all of whom embraced the Protestant doctrines, though
trained up in the Romish Church. The elder brother, who is known as
the Cardinal de Châtillon, was raised to that high ecclesiastical
dignity by Clement VII., in 1533. Chiefly through the influence which
his younger brother exerted over him, he became a convert to the
tenets of the Reformers in his middle age, and took part in the early
scenes of the civil wars. After the reverse which his party sustained
at the battle of St. Denys, he fled to England, where he died in 1571.
The younger brother, Dandelot, was the first of the three who became a
Protestant. He was a skilful and gallant soldier, and signalized
himself repeatedly by his enterprise, his inexhaustible resources, and
undaunted spirit, as a commander of the Huguenot forces from the first
outbreak of the religious wars until his death soon after the battle
of Jarnac, in 1569. Gaspard, the great Coligni, or the Admiral (as he
is often termed, from having held the titular office of Admiral of
France), was the middle one of the three brothers, and was born at
Châtillon-sur-Lion, February 16, 1517. He served with distinction in
the later wars of Francis I. against Spain; and with his brother
Dandelot received knighthood on the field of battle at Cerisoles. He
was afterward raised to the important post of colonel-general of the
French infantry, and in 1552 was nominated by Henry II. Admiral of
France. He was taken prisoner at St. Quentin by the Spaniards, and
underwent a long captivity in Spain before he regained his liberty by
payment of a heavy ransom.

During the long hours of solitude and compulsory inaction which he
passed in his Spanish prison, he meditated deeply and earnestly on
religious subjects; and after his return to France, the conversation
of his brother Dandelot, who had already joined the Huguenots,
confirmed the bias to the Protestant doctrines, which his own studies
and deliberations had created. Coligni now resigned all his
appointments and preferments, except the nominal rank of admiral, and
retired to his estates, where he passed his time in fervent devotion,
and in the enjoyment of the calm happiness of domestic life. But the
cry of suffering which rose from his fellow-Protestants, against whom
the pernicious influence of the Princes of Lorraine in the French
court kindled the fires of persecution throughout France, soon drew
him from his blameless and cherished repose. He at first sought to
provide for them a refuge from oppression, by founding colonies of
French Protestants in America; but his projects proved unsuccessful;
and as the tyranny of the violent party among the French Catholics
grew more and more alarming, Coligni deemed that both honor and
conscience required him to stand openly forward in behalf of his
co-religionists.

No class of men ever were more long-suffering, or showed more
unwillingness to rise in arms against their domestic tyrants, than the
much-calumniated Huguenots of France. When we read the hideous edicts
that were promulgated against them, and which were not mere empty
threats, but were carried into execution throughout the land with
unrelenting and strenuous ferocity, we feel that if ever the right of
self-defence can make an appeal to arms justifiable, it was so in
their instance. Extermination or apostasy formed the only choice that
their rulers offered them. Mackintosh, in his "History of the English
Revolution of 1688," has truly termed the question of when subjects
are justified in making war on their sovereign, "a tremendous
problem." But the same admirable writer has bequeathed to us a full
and luminous code of the rules and principles of immutable morality,
by which this awful issue must be tried, and no one who is familiar
with these principles can hesitate in pronouncing that the war on the
part of the French Huguenots was lawful and laudable before God and
man.

Coligni is peculiarly free from the heavy imputation, which
insurrectionary leaders incur, however great their provocation, who
introduce the appeal of battle in civil controversy, and, to use the
emphatic language of Milton, "let loose the sword of intestine war,
soaking the land in her own gore," before every other possible mode of
obtaining protection from further enormous wrong has been attempted,
and attempted in vain. He was wholly unconnected with the enterprise
(known in French history as the conspiracy of Amboise) by which some
of the Protestant chiefs designed to withdraw the young king, Francis
II., forcibly from the influence of the Guises, and which may be
considered the first overt act of insurrection. Not that Condé is to
be condemned for that effort, but the Admiral's exceeding loyalty is
proved by his having kept aloof from it. Coligni continued to seek
security for his co-religionists by peaceable means, for two years
after that unsuccessful enterprise, from the savage reprisals of the
Court upon its authors. He seemed at one time to be successful in his
blameless exertions; and in the Assembly of Notables, held in January,
1562, an edict was issued, called the "Edict of Pacification," giving
a partial toleration of the Protestant creed, and suspending all penal
proceedings on the ground of religion.

This was all that Coligni strove for. He said at the time to some of
his adherents: "If we have our religion, what do we want more?" But
those who had made this concession were treacherous as they were
cruel, and the fair promise which France seemed to have acquired of
tranquillity was destined to be soon destroyed.

Two powerful parties were arrayed against the Huguenots, one of which
consisted of their avowed and implacable enemies. This was headed by
the Guises, with whom the Constable Montmorenci, and the Maréchal St.
André had been induced to enter into league. Less fanatically violent,
but far more formidable, through its false show of moderation and
favor, was the party of the Queen-mother, Catherine de Medici.
Catherine dreaded the power of the house of Guise; and was often glad
to avail herself of the Protestant interest as a counterpoise against
them. But though the jealousy which animated herself and her sons
against the Princes of Lorraine was great, their hatred of the
Huguenots was greater; and their occasional simulation of friendship
enabled them to wreak it more malignantly and more completely.

They had sided with Coligni and Condé and the other Protestant chiefs
in enacting the Edict of Pacification, and had thereby given a check
to the power of the Duke of Guise and his confederates. But when their
temporary purpose was served, the wise provisions of that edict were
set at naught; the Protestants were again exposed to outrage and
slaughter at the hands of their foes, nor could any redress be
obtained from the royal tribunals. At length occurred the massacre of
Vassi, where the armed followers of the Duke of Guise attacked a
defenceless body of Protestants, while engaged in the services of
their church, and slaughtered several hundreds of them under the eye
of Guise, if not by his orders. Reeking from this carnage, the bands
of the Lorraines entered Paris, where they were enthusiastically
received by the fanatic populace, which was devoted to the Catholic
cause.

Condé now left the capital, and summoned the Protestant nobility and
gentry to rally round him in defence of their lives and their creed.
Coligni long delayed joining him, and evinced a hesitation and a
reluctance to embark in civil war, which emphatically attest the
goodness while they in no degree detract from the greatness of his
character. His wife, who naturally thought that anxiety on her account
aided in restraining him, exhorted him in words of more than Roman
magnanimity to arm in defence of the thousand destined victims, who
looked up to him for guidance and protection. Coligni urged on her and
on the friends who thronged round him, the fearful risks of the
enterprise, and his earnest desire to wait in patience for better
times, and rest upon the public faith rather than justify persecution
by having recourse to violence. Unconvinced and undaunted, the heroine
renewed her entreaties to the lingering hero. She told him that such
prudence was not wisdom toward God. D'Aubigné professes to report this
remarkable conversation from the lips of those who were present; and
he states that she proceeded to urge on him these words:--

"God has bestowed on you the genius of a great captain--will you
refuse the use of it to his children? You have confessed to the
justice of their cause--is not the knightly sword you bear pledged to
the defence of the oppressed? Sir, my heart bleeds for our slaughtered
brethren--and their blood cries out to God and Heaven against you as
the murderer of those whom you might have saved."

"Since," replied the Admiral, "the reasons which I have this evening
alleged against an ineffectual resistance have made so little
impression upon your mind, lay your hand upon your heart and answer me
this question, Could you, without murmuring against Providence and the
husband to whom Heaven has united you, receive the news of a general
defeat? Are you prepared to endure the opprobrium of your enemies--the
reproaches of your friends--the treachery of partisans--the curses of
the people--confiscation, flight, exile--the insolence of the English,
the quarrels of the Germans--shame, nakedness, hunger--and, what is
worse, to suffer all this in your children? Are you prepared to see
your husband branded as a rebel and dragged to a scaffold; while your
children, disgraced and ruined, are begging their bread at the hands
of their enemies? I give you eight days to reflect upon it, and when
you shall be well prepared for such reverses, I will be ready to set
forward, and perish with you and our mutual friends."

"The eight days are already expired!" she cried. "Go, sir, where your
duty calls you. Heaven will not give the victory to our enemies. In
the name of God, I call upon you to resist no longer, but to save our
brethren, or die in the attempt."

On the next morning Coligni was on horseback, with all his retainers
round him; and with a heavy heart but a clear conscience, he rode on
his way to join Condé at Meaux, which was now, in the early spring of
1562, the head-quarters of the insurgent Huguenots.

The high rank of the Prince of Condé, as well as his brilliant
abilities and chivalrous courage, caused him to be acknowledged as
chief of the Protestant party; but Coligni was looked on by friends
and foes as the main pillar of their cause; and it was he that gave
organization to the volunteers who flocked around himself and the
prince, first at Meaux, and afterward in greater numbers at Orleans,
when toward the end of March they succeeded in occupying that
important city, and making it a centre of operations for the Huguenot
confederacy. Like Cromwell in after times, Coligni relied on the
religious enthusiasm as well as the natural bravery of his troops. He
exercised them by preaching and prayer as well as by drilling and
manoeuvring. He inspired them with his own spirit of austere devotion
to their cause; and the Huguenot army was in its first campaigns as
conspicuous for good order and morality as for valor; though by
degrees it became tainted with a tendency to marauding and to brutal
violence.

The Roman Catholic party now sought support from Philip II. of Spain,
from the Duke of Savoy, the emperor and other foreign princes of their
creed, and the Huguenots, to the deep regret of Coligni, were
compelled to strengthen themselves by similar negotiations. The
English queen, Elizabeth, promised succors in men and money, on
condition of Havre (which city, like most of the other strong places
in Normandy, was devoted to the Protestant cause) being placed in her
power as a security for repayment. The German Lutheran princes
permitted a large auxiliary force of lansquenets and heavy-armed
cavalry to be raised among their subjects in behalf of the French
Protestants; and Dandelot was despatched into Germany to place himself
at their head, and lead them across the Rhine; a difficult operation,
which he accomplished with great skill, and joined his brothers and
Condé at Pluviers, near Orleans, late in the year, and at a crisis
when the fortunes of the Protestant party appeared reduced to a very
low ebb, as in the interval which had elapsed since the commencement
of the war, though there had been no engagement between the main
armies, the Royalists had gained numerous advantages, and had captured
many towns, both in the South and in Normandy, which had originally
declared for the insurgents.

Coligni and Condé with their own troops and their German allies now
(December, 1562) marched upon Paris; but finding it hopeless to
attempt the storm or siege of the capital, they led their army toward
Normandy, desiring to form a junction with the English troops at
Havre. The Royal forces, commanded nominally by the Constable
Montmorenci and the Maréchal de St. André, but in which the Duke of
Guise was also present, marched for some days on their flank, till the
two armies came into collision on December 19th at Dreux, where the
first battle of the civil wars was fought. In this action, after many
vicissitudes of fortune, the Duke of Guise secured the victory for the
Roman Catholics, and Condé was taken prisoner. Coligni led the remains
of the Protestant army back to Orleans; whither the Duke of Guise, at
the head of a largely recruited army, flushed by their recent victory,
soon advanced, with the intention of crushing insurrection and
Protestantism, by the capture of their stronghold.

Coligni's situation now seemed desperate. His German mercenaries in
arrear of pay, threatened to desert him; the funds which he had been
able to collect for the conduct of the war were exhausted; and he was
utterly unable to encounter the numerous and well-appointed forces of
Guise. In this emergency he formed the bold plan of leaving his
brother, Dandelot, with the bulk of the infantry to defend Orleans,
while he himself led the cavalry and a few companies of foot again to
Normandy, and again attempted to avail himself of the English supplies
of money and troops. In spite of the mutinous murmurings of the German
reisters, in spite of the attempts which the Roman Catholic commanders
made to intercept him, Coligni executed his daring scheme. Havre was
reached. The English subsidies were secured, and the rich and powerful
city of Caen voluntarily placed itself in Coligni's power. Meanwhile
Orleans had been well defended by Dandelot; and the great chief of the
Roman Catholics, the Duke of Guise, had died by the hand of an
assassin. Some attempts were made to implicate Coligni in the guilt of
this murder, but the Admiral indignantly denied the charge; nor is
there any ground for believing him to have had the least cognizance of
Poltrot's crime.

The death of Guise made a temporary pacification easy; and the edict
of Amboise, on March 19, 1563, by which a narrow and restricted
permission for the exercise of the Protestant religion was allowed,
closed the first war.

This peace on the part of the Royalists was only a hollow and a
treacherous truce. Fresh communications with Philip II. were opened;
and an interview took place in 1564 at Bayonne, between Catherine, her
son Charles IX., and the Duke of Alva. There is every reason to
believe that at that meeting the destruction of the Protestants by
craft or by force was concerted. The treaty of Amboise was now openly
and repeatedly violated by the fanatic party of the French Roman
Catholics; and the Huguenots were again driven to take up arms in
self-defence. Condé and Coligni advanced upon Paris, and fought on
November 10, 1567, the sanguinary battle of St. Denys against the
Royalist forces. The Huguenots were beaten, but Coligni rallied them,
and marching toward the Meuse, effected a junction with fresh bands of
German auxiliaries. The war now raged with redoubled horror in every
district of France. Alarmed at the strength of the Huguenot army,
Catherine tried and successfully exerted her powers of persuasion and
deceit over Condé, and a second faithless peace, called the treaty of
Longjumeau, was concluded; but when the Huguenot forces were
disbanded, and their German auxiliaries dismissed, the Royalists
renewed the war.

In 1569, the indiscreet spirit of Condé brought the Protestants into
action at Jarnac, under heavy disadvantages, against the flower of the
Catholic army. Condé was killed in the battle, and a large part of his
forces routed with heavy slaughter; but Coligni was again the Ajax of
the cause, covered the retreat, and reorganized the fugitives for
fresh exertions. But the waves of calamity were not yet spent. The
hostile armies met again at Moncontour, and the Protestants sustained
the most complete and murderous overthrow that had been dealt to them
throughout the war. Coligni's brother, the gallant Dandelot, was
mortally wounded in this disastrous field; many of his stanchest
friends had fallen; many abandoned him; and he found himself a
fugitive, with only a few bands of mutineers around him, the wreck of
the gallant army that he had lately led.

But it was in this depth of gloom that the true heroic lustre of his
soul was seen. Fearless himself of what man could do unto him, he
calmed the panic of his followers, and inspired them with his own
energy. He who has innate strength to stand amid the storm, will soon
find others flock around and fortify him while they seek support for
themselves. When it was known that Coligni's banner still was flying,
the Protestants of France and Eastern Germany, who at first had been
stunned by the report of Moncontour, thronged to him as to a strong
tower in the midst of trouble. While the Royalists were exulting at
the fancied annihilation of their foe, they suddenly learned that
Coligni was approaching the capital, at the head of the largest army
that the Huguenots had yet sent into the field. Again the device of a
treacherous pacification was attempted, and again it prevailed.
Coligni was warned of the personal danger that he incurred by trusting
the faith of a Medici and a Guise; but he replied that he would rather
lay down his life, than see France continue the victim of the woes of
civil war.

The treaty of St. Germains was signed on August 8, 1570, and on August
24, 1572, the Massacre of St. Bartholomew attested with what worse
than Punic faith the crowned conspirators of the French Court had
planned it. In the interval, the most detestable and elaborate
hypocrisy was employed to lull the suspicions of the Huguenot chiefs,
and to bring them defenceless into the power of their enemies. At
last, in the summer of 1572, they were collected in Paris, under the
pretence of being the honored guests of the French king, at the
nuptials of his sister with Henry of Navarre. An attempt was made on
the life of Coligni by an assassin, in which the Admiral was severely
wounded. The king and his courtiers affected the utmost indignation at
this crime, and the warmest sympathy with the suffering veteran. But
in the early dawn of the day appointed for the most unchristian
carnage that ever defiled the earth, a party of murderers, headed by
the young Duke of Guise himself, broke open the doors of the house
where Coligni lay, and Besme, one of the duke's domestics, entered
with a drawn sword, into the room where the Admiral was sitting in an
arm-chair.

"Young man," said he, undisturbed, "you ought to respect my gray
hairs; but do as you please, you can only shorten my life a few days."

Besme thrust him through in many places, and then threw his body,
still breathing, out of the window into the court, where it fell at
the feet of the Duke of Guise. The minions of the Louvre flocked
around in hideous glee, to insult the lifeless form of him, before
whom they had so long quailed and trembled. They gibbeted their own
infamy in vainly seeking to dishonor the illustrious dead. His memory
is at once the glory and the shame of France: and the very land of the
St. Bartholomew is, to some extent, hallowed by having been the
birthplace of Coligni, and the scene of his heroic career.

I do not pause to describe the tardy homage which his countrymen
afterward paid to the name and relics of the fallen great. These
obsequies and panegyrics may be looked on as some small expiation for
the national guilt of France, but Coligni needed them not.




HENRY IV. OF FRANCE

(1553-1610)

[Illustration: Henry IV. [TN]]


Henry IV., the most celebrated, the most beloved, and perhaps, in
spite of his many faults, the best of the French monarchs, was born at
Pau, the capital of Béarn, in 1553. His parents were Antoine de
Bourbon, Duke of Vendôme, and in right of his wife, titular king of
Navarre, and Jeanne d'Albert, the heiress of that kingdom. On the
paternal side he traced his descent to Robert of Clermont, fifth son
of Louis IX., and thus, on the failure of the elder branches, became
heir to the crown of France. Educated by a Protestant mother in the
Protestant faith, he was for many years the rallying point and leader
of the Huguenots. In boyhood the prince of Béarn displayed sense and
spirit above his years. Early inured to war, he was present and
exhibited strong proofs of military talent at the battle of Jarnac,
and that of Moncontour, both fought in 1569. In the same year he was
declared chief of the Protestant League. The treaty of St. Germain,
concluded in 1570, guaranteed to the Huguenots the civil rights for
which they had been striving; and, in appearance, to cement the union
of the two parties, a marriage was proposed between Henry, who, by the
death of his mother, had just succeeded to the throne of Navarre, and
Margaret of Valois, sister of Charles IX. This match brought Condé,
Coligni, and all the leaders of their party, to Paris. The ceremony
took place August 17, 1572, and a week later came the massacre of St.
Bartholomew. For three years afterward Henry, who to save his life had
conformed to the established religion, was kept as a kind of
state-prisoner. He escaped in 1576, and put himself at the head of the
Huguenot party. In the war which ensued, with the sagacity and fiery
courage of the high-born general, he showed the indifference to
hardships of the meanest soldier. Content with the worst fare and
meanest lodging, in future times the magnificent monarch of France
could recollect when his wardrobe could not furnish him with a change
of linen. He shared all fortunes with his followers, and was rewarded
by their unbounded devotion.

Upon the extinction of the house of Valois, by the assassination of
Henry III. in 1589, Henry of Navarre became the rightful owner of the
French throne. But his religion interfered with his claims. The League
was strong in force against him: he had few friends, few fortresses,
no money, and a small army. But his courage and activity made up for
the scantiness of his resources. With five thousand men he withstood
the Duc de Mayenne, who was pursuing him with twenty-five thousand,
and gained the battle of Arques, in spite of the disparity. This
extraordinary result may probably be ascribed in great measure to the
contrast of personal character in the two generals. Mayenne was slow
and indolent. Of Henry it was said, that he lost less time in bed than
Mayenne lost at table; and that he wore out very little broad-cloth,
but a great deal of boot-leather. A person was once extolling the
skill and courage of Mayenne in Henry's presence. "You are right,"
said Henry, "he is a great captain, but I have always five hours'
start of him." Henry got up at four in the morning, and Mayenne about
ten.

The battle of Arques was fought in the year of his accession. In the
following year, 1590, he gained a splendid victory at Ivri, over the
Leaguers commanded by Mayenne, and a Spanish army superior in numbers.
On this occasion he made that celebrated speech to his soldiers before
the battle: "If you lose sight of your standards, rally round my white
plume; you will always find it in the path of honor and glory." Nor is
his exclamation to his victorious troops less worthy of record: "Spare
the French!"

Paris was soon blockaded, but the Parliament swore on the Gospels, in
the presence of the Legate and the Spanish Ambassador, to refuse all
proposals of accommodation. The siege was pushed to such extremities,
and the famine became so cruel, that bread was made of human bones
ground to powder. That Henry did not then master the capital, where
two hundred thousand men were maddened with want, was owing to his own
lenity. He declared that he had rather lose Paris, than gain
possession of it by the death of so many persons. He gave a free
passage through his lines to all who were not soldiers, and allowed
his own troops to send in refreshments to their friends. By this
paternal kindness he lost the fruit of his labors to himself; but he
also prolonged the civil war, and the calamities of the kingdom at
large.

The approach of the Duke of Parma with a Spanish army obliged Henry to
raise the siege of Paris. It was not the policy of the Spanish court
to render the Leaguers independent of its assistance, and the duke,
satisfied with having relieved the metropolis, avoided an engagement,
and returned to his government in the Low Countries, followed by Henry
as far as the frontiers of Picardy. In 1591 Henry received succors
from England and Germany, and laid siege to Rouen; but his prey was
again snatched from him by the Duke of Parma. Again battle was offered
and declined; and the retiring army passed the Seine in the night on a
bridge of boats; a retreat the more glorious, as Henry believed it to
be impossible. The duke once said of his adversary, that other
generals made war like lions or wild boars; but that Henry hovered
over it like an eagle.

During the siege of Paris, some conferences had been held between the
chiefs of the two parties, which ended in a kind of accommodation. The
Catholics of the king's party began to complain of his perseverance in
Calvinism; and some influential men who were of the latter persuasion,
especially his confidential friend and minister Rosny, represented to
him the necessity of a change. Even some of the reformed ministers
softened the difficulty, by acknowledging salvation to be possible in
the Roman Church. In 1593 the ceremony of abjuration was performed at
St. Denis, in presence of a multitude of the Parisians. If, as we
cannot but suppose, the monarch's conversion was owing to political
motives, the apostacy must be answered for at a higher than any human
tribunal; politically viewed, it was perhaps one of the most
beneficial steps ever taken toward the pacification and renewal of
prosperity of a great kingdom. In the same year he was crowned at
Chartres, and in 1594 Paris opened her gates to him. He had just been
received into the capital, where he was conspicuously manifesting his
beneficence and zeal for the public good, when he was wounded in the
throat by John Châtel, a young fanatic. When the assassin was
questioned, he avowed the doctrine of tyrannicide, and quoted the
sermons of the Jesuits in his justification. That society therefore
was banished by the Parliament.

For two years after his ostensible conversion, the king was obliged
daily to perform the most humiliating ceremonies, by way of penance;
and it was not till 1594 that he was absolved by Clement VIII. The
Leaguers then had no further pretext for rebellion, and the League
necessarily was dissolved. Its chiefs exacted high terms for their
submission; but the civil wars had so exhausted the kingdom, that
tranquillity could not be too dearly purchased; and Henry was faithful
to all his promises, even after his authority was so firmly
established, that he might have broken his word with safety to all but
his own conscience and honor. Although the obligations which he had to
discharge were most burdensome, he found means to relieve his people,
and make his kingdom prosper. The Duke de Mayenne, in Burgundy, and
the Duke de Mercoeur in Brittany, were the last to protract an
unavailing resistance; but the former was reduced in 1596, and the
latter in 1598, and thenceforth France enjoyed almost uninterrupted
peace till Henry's death. But the Protestants gave him almost as much
uneasiness as the Catholic Leaguers. He had granted liberty of
conscience to the former; a measure which was admitted to be
necessary by the prudent even among the latter. Nevertheless, either
from vexation at his having abjured their religion, from the violence
of party zeal, or disgust at being no longer the objects of royal
preference, the Calvinists preferred their demands in so seditious a
tone, as stopped little short of a rebellious one. While on the road
to Brittany, he determined to avoid greater evils by timely
compromise. The edict of Nantes was then promulgated, authorizing the
public exercise of their religion in several towns, granting them the
right of holding offices, putting them in possession of certain places
for eight years, as pledges for their security, and establishing
salaries for their ministers. The clergy and preachers demurred, but
to no purpose; the Parliament ceased to resist the arguments of the
Prince, when he represented to them as magistrates, that the peace of
the state and the prosperity of the Church must be inseparable. At the
same time he endeavored to convince the bigots among the priesthood on
both sides, that the love of country and the performance of civil and
political duties may be completely reconciled with difference of
worship.

But it would be unjust to attribute these enlightened views to Henry,
without noticing that he had a friend as well as minister in Rosny,
best known as the Duke de Sully, who probably suggested many of his
wisest measures, and at all events superintended their execution, and
did his best to prevent or retrieve his sovereign's errors by
uncompromising honesty of advice and remonstrance. The allurements of
pleasure were powerful over the enthusiastic and impassioned
temperament of Henry; it was love that most frequently prevailed over
the claims of duty. The beautiful Gabrielle d'Estrées became the
absolute mistress of his heart; and he entertained hopes of obtaining
permission from Rome to divorce Margaret de Valois, from whom he had
long lived in a state of separation. Had he succeeded time enough, he
contemplated the dangerous project of marrying the favorite; but her
death saved him both from the hazard and disgrace. The sentence of
divorce, so long solicited, was at last granted, and the king married
Mary de Medici, who bore Louis XIII. to him in 1601. The match,
however, contributed little to his domestic happiness.

While France was flourishing under a vigilant and paternal
administration, while her strength was beginning to keep pace with her
internal happiness, new conspiracies were incessantly formed against
the king. Henriette d'Entragues, another favorite, not only
exasperated the Queen's peevish humor against him, but was ungrateful
enough to combine with her father, the Count d'Auvergne, and the
Spanish Court, in a plot which was timely discovered. Spite of the
many virtues and conciliatory manners of Henry, the fanatics could
never pardon his former attachment to the Protestant cause. He was
continually surrounded with traitors and assassins; almost every year
produced some attempt on his life, and he fell at last by the weapon
of a misguided enthusiast.

Shortly before his untimely end, Henry is said by some historians to
have disclosed a project for forming a Christian republic. The
proposal is stated to have been, to divide Europe into fifteen fixed
powers, none of which should be allowed to make any new acquisition,
but should together form an association for maintaining a mutual
balance, and preserving peace. This political reverie, impossible to
be realized, is not likely ever to have been actually divulged, even
if meditated by Henry, nor is there any trace of it to be found in the
history, or among the state-papers of England, Venice, or Holland, the
supposed co-operators in the scheme. His more rational design in
arming went no further than to set bounds to the ambition and power of
the house of Austria, both in Germany and Italy. Whatever may have
been the motive, his means of success were imposing. He was to march
into Germany at the head of forty thousand excellent troops. The army,
provisions, and every other necessary were in readiness. Money no
longer failed; Sully had laid up forty millions of livres in the
treasury, which were destined for this war. His alliances were already
assured, his generals had been formed by himself, and all seemed to
forebode such a storm as must probably have overwhelmed an emperor
devoted to the search after the philosopher's stone, and a king of
Spain under the dominion of the Inquisition. Henry was impatient to
join his army; but his mind had become harassed with sinister
forebodings, and his chagrin was increased by a temporary alienation
from his faithful minister. He was on his way to pay a visit of
reconciliation to Sully, when his coach was entangled as it passed
along the street. His attendants left the carriage to remove the
obstruction, and during the delay thus caused he was stabbed to the
heart by Francis Ravaillac, a native of Angoulême. This calamitous
event took place on May 14, 1610, in the fifty-seventh year of his
age. The Spaniards, who had the strongest interest in the catastrophe,
were supposed to have been the instigators; but the fear of
implicating other powers, and plunging France into greater evils than
those from which their hero had rescued them, deterred not only
statesmen, but even the judges on Ravaillac's trial, from pressing for
the names of accomplices. Hardouin de Perefixe, in his "History of
Henry the Great," says, "If it be asked who inspired the monster with
the thought, history answers that she does not know; and that in so
mysterious an affair, it is not allowable to vent suspicions and
conjectures as assured truths; that even the judges who conducted the
examinations opened not their mouths, and spoke only with their
shoulders."

The assertions of Ravaillac, as far as they have any weight,
discountenance the belief of an extended political conspiracy. The
house of Austria, Mary de Medici his wife, Henriette d'Entragues his
mistress, as well as the Duke d'Epernon, have been subjected to the
hateful conjectures of Mazarin and other historians; but he who
actually struck the blow invariably affirmed that he had no
accomplice, and that he was carried forward by an uncontrollable
instinct. If his mind were at all acted on from without, it was
probably by the epidemic fanaticism of the times, rather than by
personal influence.

Henry left three sons and three daughters by Mary de Medici. Of no
prince recorded in history, probably, are so many personal anecdotes
related, as of Henry IV. These are for the most part well known, and
of easy access. Among them stands out prominently the tale of the
Spanish ambassador who to his astonishment, found Henry on the floor
playing hobby-horse for his children. "Are you a father?" asked Henry,
looking up without any apparent embarrassment. "Yes, your majesty."
"Then we will finish our game," said the king. And he did so, before
taking up his business with the ambassador.

The whole tenor of Henry's life exhibits a lofty, generous, forgiving
temper, the fearless spirit which loves the excitement of danger, and
that suavity of feeling and manners, which, above all qualities, wins
the affection of those who come within its sphere: it does not exhibit
high moral or religious principle. But his weaknesses were those which
the world most readily pardons, especially in a great man. If Henry
had emulated the pure morals and fervent piety of his noble ancestor,
Louis IX., he would have been a far better king, as well as a better
man; yet we doubt whether in that case his memory would have been
cherished with such enthusiastic attachment by his countrymen.

[Illustration: Henry IV. of France at home.]




SIR FRANCIS DRAKE

(1540-1596)

[Illustration: Francis Drake. [TN]]


Francis Drake, the first British circumnavigator of the globe, was
born in Devonshire, of humble parents. So much is admitted; with
respect to the date of his birth, and the method of his nurture, the
annalists, Camden and Stowe, are not agreed. By the latter we are told
that Drake was born at Tavistock, about 1545, and brought up under the
care of a kinsman, the well-known navigator, Sir John Hawkins. Camden,
on the other hand, anticipates his birth by several years, and says
that he was bound apprentice to a small shipowner on the coast of
Kent, who, dying unmarried, in reward of his industry bestowed his
bark upon him as a legacy. Both accounts agree that in 1567 he went
with Hawkins to the West Indies on a trading voyage, which gave its
color to the rest of his life. Their little squadron was obliged by
stress of weather to put into St. Juan de Ulloa, on the coast of
Mexico; where, after being received with a show of amity, it was beset
and attacked by a superior force, and only two vessels escaped. To
make amends for his losses in this adventure, in the quaint language
of the biographer Prince, in his "Worthies of Devon," "Mr. Drake was
persuaded by the minister of his ship that he might lawfully
recover the value of the King of Spain by reprisal, and repair his
losses upon him anywhere else. The case was clear in sea divinity; and
few are such infidels as not to believe in doctrines which make for
their profit. Whereupon Drake, though then a poor private man,
undertook to revenge himself upon so mighty a monarch."

In the years 1570-71 Drake made two voyages to the West Indies,
apparently to gain a more precise acquaintance with the seas, the
situation, strength, and wealth of the Spanish settlements. In 1572 he
sailed with two ships, one of seventy-five tons, the other of
twenty-five tons, their united crews mustering only seventy-three men
and boys, all volunteers. His object was to capture the now ruined
city of Nombre de Dios, situated on the Isthmus of Panama, a few miles
east of Porto Bello, then the great repository of all the treasure
conveyed from Mexico to Spain. Off this coast of America his little
armament was augmented by an English bark, with thirty men on board;
so that, deducting those whom it was necessary to leave in charge of
the ships, his available force fell short of a hundred men. This
handful of bold men attacked the town, which was unwalled, on the
night of July 22d, and found their way to the marketplace, where the
captain received a severe wound. He concealed his hurt until the
public treasury was reached; but before it could be broken open, he
became faint from loss of blood, and his disheartened followers
abandoned the attempt, and carried him perforce on board ship. Such at
least, is the account of the English; there is a Portuguese statement
in "Hakluyt's Voyages," vol. iii., p. 525, less favorable both to the
daring and success of the assailants.

Failing in this attempt, Drake continued for some time on the coast,
visiting Carthagena and other places, and making prize of various
ships; and if we wonder at his hardihood in adventuring with such
scanty means to remain for months in the midst of an awakened and
inveterate enemy, how much more surprising is it that the wealthy,
proud, and powerful monarchy of Spain should so neglect the care of
its most precious colonies, as to leave them unable to crush so slight
a foe! The English appear to have felt perfectly at their ease; they
cruised about, formed an intimate alliance with an Indian tribe, named
Symerons, the bond of union being a common hatred of the Spaniards,
and built a fort on a small island of difficult access, at the mouth
of a river, where they remained from September 24 to February 3, 1573.
On the latter day, Drake set forth with one portion of his associates,
under the conduct of the Symerons, to cross the isthmus. On the fourth
day they reached a central hill, where stood a remarkable "goodly and
great high tree, in which the Indians had cut and made divers steps to
ascend up neere unto the top, where they had also made a convenient
bower, wherein ten or twelve men might easily sitt; and from thence
wee might without any difficulty plainly see the Atlantic Ocean,
whence now wee came, and the South Atlantic (_i.e._, Pacific), so much
desired. After our captain had ascended to this bower with the chief
Symeron, and having, as it pleased God at that time, by reason of the
brize, a very faire day, had seen that sea of which he had heard such
golden reports, he besought Almighty God of his goodness to give him
life and leave to sayle once in an English ship in that sea." We quote
from a tract entitled "Sir Francis Drake Revived," written by some of
Drake's companions, corrected, it is said, by himself, and published
by his nephew in 1626, which contains a full and interesting account
of this adventurous expedition. Drake's present object was to
intercept a convoy of treasure on the way from Panama to Nombre de
Dios. By this route the treasures of Peru and Chili, as well as
Mexico, were brought to Europe, for the passage round Cape Horn was
then unknown, and no ship but Magellan's had yet accomplished the
passage round the world to Europe. Guided by the Symerons, the English
approached Panama, learned that a valuable treasure was expected to
pass, and beset the lonely forest road which it had to travel. But the
haste of one drunken man gave a premature alarm, in consequence of
which the march of the caravan was stopped; and Drake with his party,
their golden hopes being thus defeated, forced their way through Venta
Cruz, and returned by a shorter route to their encampment, after a
toilsome and fruitless journey of three weeks. It was not till April
1st, that the long-desired opportunity presented itself, on which day
they took a caravan of mules laden with silver and a small quantity of
gold. They carried off part of the spoil, and buried about fifteen
tons of silver; but on returning for it, they found that it had been
recovered by the Spaniards.

Drake returned to England, August 9, 1573. In dividing the treasure he
showed the strictest honor, and even generosity; yet his share was
large enough to pay for fitting out three ships, with which he served
as a volunteer in Ireland, under the Earl of Essex, and "did excellent
service both by sea and land in the winning of divers strong forts."
In 1577, he obtained a commission from Queen Elizabeth to conduct a
squadron into the South Seas. What was the purport of the commission
we do not find; it appears from subsequent passages that it gave to
Drake the power of life and death over his followers; but it would
seem from the queen's hesitation in approving his proceedings, that it
was not intended to authorize (at least formally) his depradations on
Spanish property.

With five ships, the largest the Pelican, of one hundred tons burden,
the smallest a pinnace of fifteen tons, manned in all with only 164
men, Drake sailed from Plymouth, November 15, 1577, to visit seas
where no English vessel had ever sailed. Without serious loss, or
adventure worthy of notice, the fleet arrived at Port St. Julian, on
the coast of Patagonia, June 20, 1578. Here the discoverer Magellan
had tried and executed his second in command on the charge of mutiny,
and the same spot did Drake select to perform a similar tragedy. He
accused the officer next to himself, Thomas Doughty, of plots to
defeat the expedition and take his life; plots undertaken, he said,
before they had left England. "Proofs were required and alleged, so
many and so evident, that the gentleman himself, stricken with
remorse, acknowledged himself to have deserved death;" and of three
things presented to him, either immediate execution, or to be set on
shore on the main, or to be sent home to answer for his conduct, he
chose the former; and having at his own request received the
sacrament, together with Drake, and dined with him in further token
of amity, he cheerfully laid his head on the block, according to the
sentence pronounced by forty of the chiefest persons in the fleet.
Such is the account published by Drake's nephew, in "The World
Encompassed," of which we shall only observe, without passing judgment
on the action, that Drake's conduct in taking out a person whom he
knew to be ill affected to him, was as singular as is the behavior and
sudden and acute penitence attributed to Doughty. But we have no
account from any friend of the sufferer. It is fair to state the
judgment of Camden, who says, "that the more unprejudiced men in the
fleet thought Doughty had been guilty of insubordination, and that
Drake in jealousy removed him as a rival. But some persons, who
thought they could see farther than others, said that Drake had been
ordered by the Earl of Leicester to take off Doughty, because he
spread a report that Leicester had procured the death of the Earl of
Essex."

Having remained at Port St. Julian until August 15th, they sailed for
the Straits, reached them August 20th, and passed safely into the
Pacific, September 6th, with three ships, having taken out the men and
stores, and abandoned the two smaller vessels. But there arose on the
7th a dreadful storm, which dispersed the ships. The Marigold was no
more heard of, while the dispirited crew of the Elizabeth returned to
England, being the first who ever passed back to the eastward through
Magellan's Strait. Drake's ship was driven southward to the
fifty-sixth degree, where he ran in among the islands of the extreme
south of America. He fixes the farthest land to be near the
fifty-sixth degree of south latitude, and thus appears to claim the
honor of having discovered Cape Horn. From September 7th to October
28th, the adventurers were buffeted by one continued and dreadful
storm; and in estimating the merits of our intrepid seamen, it is to
be considered that the seas were utterly unknown, and feared by all,
those who had tried to follow in Magellan's course having seldom
succeeded, and then with much pain and loss, and little fruit of their
voyage; that their vessels were of a class which is now hardly used
for more than coasting service; and that the imperfection of
instruments and observations laid them under disadvantages which are
now removed by the ingenuity of our artists. Add to this, that as the
Spaniards gave out that it was impossible to repass the Straits, there
remained no known way to quit the hostile shores of America, but by
traversing the unexplored Pacific.

The storm at length ceased, and the lonely Pelican (which Drake,
however, had renamed the Golden Hind) ran along the coast of Lima and
Peru, reaping a golden harvest from the careless security of those who
never thought to see an enemy on that side of the globe. There is
something rather revolting, but very indicative of the temper of the
age, in the constant reference to the guidance and protection of God,
mixed with a quiet jocularity with which "Master Francis Fletcher,
preacher in this employment," from whose notes the "World
Encompassed," which is a narrative of this voyage, was compiled,
speaks of acts very little different from highway robbery, such as
would now be held disgraceful in open war; as for instance, on
meeting a Spaniard driving eight llamas, each laden with one hundred
pounds' weight of silver, "they offered their service without
entreaty, and became drovers, not enduring to see a gentleman Spaniard
turned carrier." Enriched by the most valuable spoil, jewels, gold,
and silver, Drake steered to the northward, hoping to discover a
homeward passage in that quarter. In the forty-eighth degree of north
latitude, in what is now the State of Washington, he was stopped by
the cold; and, determining to traverse the Pacific, he landed,
careened his ship, and, in the queen's name, took possession of the
country, which he named New Albion, September 29, 1579; he sailed
again, and reached the Molucca Islands November 4th. In his passage
thence to the island of Celebes, he incurred the most imminent danger
of the whole voyage. The ship struck, as they were sailing before a
fair wind, on a reef of rocks, so precipitous that it was impossible
to lay out an anchor to heave her off. They stuck fast in this most
hazardous situation for eight hours. At the end of that time the wind
shifted, and the ship, lightened of part of her guns and cargo, reeled
off into deep water, without serious injury. Had the sea risen, she
must have been wrecked. This was Drake's last mishap. He reached
Plymouth in the autumn of 1580, after nearly three years' absence.
Accounts differ as to the exact date of his arrival.

Since Drake had for this voyage the queen's commission, by which we
must suppose the license to rob the Spaniards to have been at least
tacitly conceded, he seems to have been rather hardly used, in being
left from November to April in ignorance how his bold adventure was
received at court. Among the people it created a great sensation, with
much diversity of opinion; some commending it as a notable instance of
English valor and maritime skill, and a just reprisal upon the
Spaniards for their faithless and cruel practices; others styling it a
breach of treaties, little better than piracy, and such as it was
neither expedient nor decent for a trading nation to encourage. During
this interval, Drake must have felt his situation unpleasant and
precarious; but the queen turned the scale in his favor by going,
April 4, 1581, to dine on board his ship at Deptford, on which
occasion she declared her entire approbation of his conduct, and
conferred on him the honor, and such it then was, of knighthood. His
ship she ordered to be preserved as a monument of his glory. Having
fallen to decay, it was at length broken up: a chair, made out of its
planks, was presented to the University of Oxford, and probably is
still to be seen in the Bodleian Library. Cowley wrote a Pindaric ode
upon it.

[Illustration: The admiral of the Spanish Armada surrenders to Drake.]

Drake had now established his reputation as the first seaman of the
day; and in 1585 the queen, having resolved on war, intrusted him with
the command of an expedition against the Spanish colonies. He burnt or
put to ransom the cities of St. Jago, near Cape Verde, St. Domingo,
Carthagena, and others, and returned to England, having fully answered
the high expectations which were entertained of him. He was again
employed with a larger force of thirty ships, in 1587, with which he
entered the port of Cadiz, burnt ten thousand tons of shipping, which
were to form part of the Armada, took the castle of Cape St. Vincent,
and sailing to the Azores, made prize of a large and wealthy ship
on its way from the Indies. Still more eminent were his services
against the Armada in the following year, in which he served as
vice-admiral under Lord Howard of Effingham. But these are well-known
passages of history, and we have shortened our account of them, to
relate at more length the early incidents of Drake's adventurous life.

In 1589 Sir Francis Drake and Sir John Norris were joined in the
command of an expedition, meant to deliver Portugal from the dominion
of Spain. This failed, as many expeditions have done in which the sea
and land services were meant to act together; and as usual, each party
threw the blame on the other. Drake's plan appears to have been most
judicious: it was at least accordant with his character, downright and
daring. He wished to sail straight for Lisbon and surprise the place;
but Norris was bent on landing at Corunna, where he did indeed some
harm to the Spaniards, but no service toward the real objects of the
expedition. When the land forces did at last besiege Lisbon, Drake was
unwilling or unable to force his way up the Tagus to co-operate with
them, and for this he was afterward warmly blamed by Norris. He
defended himself by stating that the time misspent by the English at
Corunna, had been well employed by the Spaniards in fortifying Lisbon;
and we fully believe that neither fear nor jealousy would have made
him hesitate at anything which he thought to be for the good of the
service. This miscarriage, though for a time it cast something of a
cloud upon Drake's fame, did not prevent his being again employed in
1595, when the queen, at the suggestion of himself and Sir John
Hawkins, determined to send out another expedition against Spanish
America, under those two eminent navigators, the expenses of which
were in great part to be defrayed by themselves and their friends.
Great hope was naturally conceived of this expedition, the largest
which had yet been sent against that quarter, for it consisted of
thirty vessels and 2,500 men. The chief object was to sail to Nombre
de Dios, march to Panama, and there seize the treasure from Peru. But
the blow, which should have been struck immediately, was delayed by a
feint on the part of the Spaniards to invade England; the Plate fleet
arrived in safety, and the Spanish colonies were forewarned. Hawkins
died, it was said of grief at the ruined prospects of the expedition,
November 12th, while the fleet lay before Porto Rico; and on the same
evening Drake had a narrow escape from a cannon-ball, which carried
the stool from under him as he sat at supper and killed two of his
chief officers. Repulsed from Porto Rico, the admiral steered for the
Spanish main, where he burnt several towns, and among them Nombre de
Dios. He then sent a strong detachment of 750 men against Panama; but
they found the capture of that city impracticable. Soon afterward he
fell sick of a fever, and died January 28, 1596. His death, like that
of his coadjutor, is attributed to mental distress, and nothing is
more probable than that disappointment may have made that noxious
climate more deadly. Hints of poisoning were thrown out, but this is a
surmise easily and often lightly made. "Thus," says Fuller, in his
"Holy State," "an extempore performance, scarce heard to be begun
before we hear it is ended, comes off with better applause, or
miscarries with less disgrace, than a long-studied and openly
premeditated action. Besides, we see how great spirits, having mounted
up to the highest pitch of performance, afterward strain and break
their credits in trying to go beyond it. We will not justify all the
actions of any man, though of a tamer profession than a sea-captain,
in whom civility is often counted preciseness. For the main, we say
that this our captain was a religious man toward God, and his houses,
generally speaking, churches, where he came chaste in his life, just
in his dealings, true of his word, and merciful to those that were
under him, hating nothing so much as idleness." To these good
qualities we may add that he was kind and considerate to his sailors,
though strict in the maintenance of discipline; and liberal on fit
occasions, though a strict economist. He cut a water-course from
Buckland Abbey to Plymouth, a distance of seven miles in a straight
line, and thirty by the windings of the conduit, to supply the latter
town with fresh water, which before was not to be procured within the
distance of a mile. He is honorably distinguished from the atrocious
race of buccaneers, to whom his example in some sort gave rise, by the
humanity with which he treated his prisoners. And it should be
mentioned, as a proof of his judicious benevolence, that in
conjunction with Sir John Hawkins, he procured the establishment of
the Chest at Chatham for the relief of aged or sick seamen, out of
their own voluntary contributions. The faults ascribed to him are
ambition, inconstancy in friendship, and too much desire of
popularity.

In person Drake was low, but strongly made, "well favoured, fayre, and
of a cheerefull countenance." He left no issue: his nephew was created
a baronet by James I., and the title is still extant.




SIR WALTER RALEIGH

(1552-1618)


Very little is known concerning the youth of Sir Walter Raleigh. He
was a younger son, descended of an ancient family, and was born at a
farm called Hayes, near the mouth of the river Otter, in Devonshire,
in the year 1552. He went to Oriel College, Oxford, at an early age,
and gained high praise for the quickness and precocity of his talents.
In 1569 he began his military career in the civil wars of France, as a
volunteer in the Protestant cause. It is conjectured that he remained
in France for more than six years, and returned to England in 1576.
Soon after he repaired to the Netherlands, and served as a volunteer
against the Spaniards. In such schools, and under such leaders as
Coligni and the Prince of Orange, Raleigh's natural aptitude for
political and military science received the best nurture; but he was
soon drawn from the war in Holland by a pursuit which had captivated
his imagination from an early age--the prosecution of discovery in
the New World. In conjunction with his half-brother, Sir Humphrey
Gilbert, a man of courage and ability, and a skilful sailor, he made
an unsuccessful attempt to establish a colony in North America.
Returning home in 1579, he immediately entered the Queen's army in
Ireland, and served with good esteem for personal courage and
professional skill, until the suppression of the rebellion in that
country. He owed his introduction to court, and the personal favor of
Elizabeth, as is traditionally reported, to a fortunate and
well-improved accident, which is too familiar to need repetition here.
It is probable, however, that his name and talents were not unknown,
for we find him employed almost immediately in certain matters of
diplomacy.

[Illustration: Walter Raleigh. [TN]]

Among the cares and pleasures of a courtier's life, Raleigh preserved
his zeal for American discovery. He applied his own resources to the
fitting out of another expedition in 1583, under command of Sir
Humphrey Gilbert, which proved more unfortunate than the former one;
two out of five vessels returned home in consequence of sickness, and
two were wrecked, including that in which the admiral sailed; and the
only result of the enterprise was the taking possession of
Newfoundland in the name of England. Still Raleigh's desire for
American adventure was not damped. The continent northward of the Gulf
of Florida was at this time unknown. But Raleigh, upon careful study
of the best authorities, had concluded that there was good reason for
believing that a considerable tract of land did exist in that quarter;
and with the assent of the Queen in council, from whom he obtained
letters patent, granting to himself and his heirs, under certain
reservations, property in such countries as he should discover, with a
right to provide for their protection and administration, he fitted
out two ships, which sailed in April, 1584. The first land which they
made was an island named Okakoke, running parallel to the coast of
North Carolina. They were well received by the natives, and returned
to England in the following autumn, highly pleased. Nor was less
satisfaction felt by Raleigh, or even by the Queen, who conferred on
him the honor of knighthood, a title which was then in high esteem,
inasmuch as it was bestowed by that wise princess with a most frugal
and just discrimination. She also gave him a very lucrative mark of
favor, in the shape of a patent for licensing the selling of wine
throughout the kingdom; and she directed that the new country, in
allusion to herself, should be called Virginia. Raleigh did not think
it politic, perhaps was not allowed, to quit the court to take charge
in person of his undertaking; and those to whom he entrusted the
difficult task of directing the infant colony, appear to have been
unequal to their office. It is not necessary to pursue the history of
an enterprise which proved unsuccessful, and in which Sir Walter
personally bore no share. He showed his earnestness by fitting out
several expeditions, which must have been a heavy drain upon his
fortune. But he is said to have derived immense wealth from prizes
captured from the Spaniards; and we may here observe that the lavish
magnificence in dress, especially in jewels, for which Raleigh was
remarkable, even in the gorgeous court of Elizabeth (his state dress
is said to have been enriched with jewels to the value of £60,000),
may be considered less as an extravagance, than as a safe and portable
investment of treasure. A mind less active might have found employment
more than enough in the variety of occupations which pressed upon it
at home. He possessed a large estate, granted out of forfeited lands
in Ireland; but this was always a source rather of expense than of
profit, until, in 1601, he sold it to the Earl of Cork. He was
Seneschal of the Duchies of Cornwall and Exeter, and held the
wardenship of the Stannaries; and in 1586, as well as formerly in
1584, we find that he possessed a seat in Parliament. In 1587, the
formidable preparation of the Spanish Armada withdrew the mind of
Raleigh, as of all Englishmen, from objects of minor importance, to
the defence of their country. He was a member of the council of war
directed to prepare a general scheme of defence, and held the office
of Lieutenant-General of Cornwall, in addition to the charge of the
Isle of Portland; but as on this occasion he possessed no naval
command, he was not actively engaged in the destruction of that mighty
armament. In 1589 he served as a volunteer in the expedition of Norris
and Drake to Portugal, of which some account has been given in the
life of the latter. Nor were his labors unrewarded even in that
unfortunate enterprise; for he captured several prizes, and received
the present of a gold chain from the Queen, in testimony of her
approbation of his conduct.

Soon after these events, Raleigh retired to his Irish property, being
driven from court, according to some authorities, by the enmity of the
Earl of Essex, then a young man just rising into favor. He there
renewed a former intimacy with the poet Spenser, who, like himself,
had been rewarded with a grant of land out of forfeited estates, and
then resided at Kilcolman Castle. Spenser has celebrated the return of
his friend in the beautiful pastoral, "Colin Clout's come home again;"
and in that, and various passages of his works, has made honorable
mention of the highly poetic spirit which enabled the "Shepherd of the
Ocean," as he is there denominated, to appreciate the merit of the
"Fairy Queen," and led him to promote the publication of it by every
means in his power. The loss of Raleigh's court-favor, if such there
were, could not have been of long duration on this occasion But he
incurred more serious displeasure in consequence of a private marriage
contracted with Elizabeth Throgmorton, one of the Queen's maids of
honor, a lady of beauty and accomplishments, who proved her worth and
fidelity in the long train of misfortunes which beset the latter years
of Raleigh's life. In consequence of this intrigue, he was committed
to the Tower. One or two amusing anecdotes are related of the devices
which he employed to obtain forgiveness, by working on that vanity
which was the Queen's chief foible. He succeeded in appeasing his
indignant mistress so far as to procure his release; and about the
same time, in 1594, she granted to him the valuable manor of
Sherborne, in Dorsetshire; but though she requited his services, she
still forbade his appearance at court, where he now held the office of
Captain of the Yeomen of the Guard. Raleigh was peculiarly fitted to
adorn a court by his imposing person, the graceful magnificence of his
taste and habits, the elegance of his manners, and the interest of his
conversation. These accomplishments were sure passports to the favor
of Elizabeth; and he improved to the utmost the constant opportunities
of intercourse with her which his post afforded, insomuch that, except
the Earls of Leicester and Essex, no one ever seems to have stood
higher in her graces. But Elizabeth's jealousy on the subject of her
favorites' marriages is well known, and her anger was lasting, in
proportion to the value which she set on the incense of Raleigh's
flattery. He retired, on his disgrace, to his new estate, in the
improvement and embellishment of which he felt great interest. But
though deeply alive to the beauties of nature, he had been too long
trained to a life of ambition and adventure to rest contented in the
tranquil routine of a country life; and during this period of
seclusion he again turned his thoughts to his favorite subject of
American adventure, and laid the scheme of his first expedition to
Guiana, in search of the celebrated El Dorado, the fabled seat of
inexhaustible wealth. Having fitted out, with the assistance of other
private persons, a considerable fleet, Raleigh sailed from Plymouth,
February 6, 1595. He left his ships in the mouth of the river Orinoco,
and sailed 400 miles into the interior in boats. It is to be recorded
to his honor, that he treated the Indians with great kindness; which,
contrasted with the savage conduct of the Spaniards, raised so
friendly a feeling toward him, that for years his return was eagerly
expected, and at length was hailed with delight. The hardships of the
undertaking, and the natural advantages of the country which he
explored, are eloquently described in his own account of the
"Discovery of Guiana." But the setting in of the rainy season rendered
it necessary to return, without having reached the promised land of
wealth; and Raleigh reaped no other fruit of his adventure than a
certain quantity of geographical knowledge, and a full conviction of
the importance of colonizing and taking possession of the newly
discovered region. This continued through life to be his favorite
scheme; but neither Elizabeth nor her successor could be induced to
view it in the same favorable light.

On reaching England, he found the Queen still unappeased; nor was he
suffered to appear at court, and he complains in pathetic terms of the
cold return with which his perils and losses were requited. But he was
invested with a high command in the expedition of 1596, by which the
Spanish fleet was destroyed in the harbor of Cadiz; and to his
judgment and temper in overruling the faulty schemes proposed by
others, the success of that enterprise was chiefly due. Indeed, his
services were perhaps too important, and too justly appreciated by the
public, for his own interests; for the great and general praise
bestowed on him on this occasion tended to confirm a jealousy of long
standing on the part of the commander-in-chief, the Earl of Essex; and
it was probably owing to that favorite's influence that Raleigh was
still forbidden the Queen's presence. Essex, and the Secretary of
State, Sir Robert Cecil, regarded each other with mutual distrust and
dislike. Cecil and Raleigh were connected by ties of common interest,
and, as the latter supposed, of friendship. Still Raleigh found the
interest of the minister too weak to serve his purpose, while the
interest of the favorite was employed against him; and, as the only
method of effecting his own restoration to the Queen's favor, he
undertook to work a reconciliation between these two powerful rivals.
In this he succeeded, to the great admiration of all spectators; and
the fruit of his policy was seen in his re-admission to the execution
of his official duties at court, June 1, 1597. In the following August
he was appointed Rear Admiral in the expedition called the Island
Voyage, of which Essex held the chief command. The slight successes
which were obtained were again due to the military talents of Raleigh;
the main objects of the voyage were lost through the Earl's
inexperience.

From this time to the death of the Queen, Raleigh enjoyed an
uninterrupted course of favor. Elizabeth was now old; Cecil took no
steps to diminish the high esteem in which she held Sir Walter
Raleigh, but he secretly labored to prejudice her successor against
him, and he succeeded to his wish. Very soon after the accession of
James I., Raleigh's post of captain of the guard was taken from him;
and his patent of wines was revoked, though not without a nominal
compensation being made. To complete his ruin, it was contrived to
involve him in a charge of treason. Most writers have concurred in
speaking of this passage of history as inexplicable; it is the opinion
of the last historian of Raleigh, Mr. Tytler, that he has found
sufficient evidence for regarding the whole plot as a device of Cecil,
and he has supported this opinion by cogent arguments. Lord Cobham, a
violent and ambitious but weak man, had engaged in private dealings
with the Spanish ambassador, which brought him under the suspicion of
the government. By a device of Cecil's (we here follow the account of
Mr. Tytler) he was induced, in a fit of anger, and in the belief that
Raleigh had given information against him, to accuse Sir Walter
himself of being privy to a conspiracy against the government. This
charge Cobham retracted, confirmed, and retracted again, behaving in
so equivocal a manner, that no reliance whatever can be placed on any
of his assertions. But as the King was afraid of Raleigh as much as
the secretary hated him, this vague charge, unsupported by other
evidence, was made sufficient to commit him to the Tower; and, after
being plied with private examinations, in which nothing criminal could
be elicited, he was brought to trial, November 17, 1603. For an
account of that memorable scene we shall refer to Mr. Jardine's
"Criminal Trials," Vol. I. It is reported to have been said by one of
the judges who presided over it, on his death-bed, that "the justice
of England had never been so degraded and injured as by the
condemnation of Sir Walter Raleigh." The behavior of the victim
himself was the object of universal admiration, for the tempered
mixture of patience and noble spirit with which he bore the oppressive
measure dealt to him. He had before been unpopular; but it was
recorded by an eye-witness that "he behaved himself so worthily, so
wisely, and so temperately, that in half a day the mind of all the
company was changed from the extremest hate to the extremest pity."

The sentence of death thus unfairly and disgracefully obtained was not
immediately carried into execution. James was not satisfied with the
evidence adduced on the trial; and believing at the same time that
Raleigh had been plotting against him, he set his royal wit to dive
into the mystery. Of the singular scene which the British Solomon
devised it is not necessary to speak, since Raleigh was not an actor
in it. But as no more evidence could be obtained against him, even by
the King's sagacity, he was reprieved, and remanded to the Tower,
where the next twelve years of his life were spent in confinement.
Fortunately, he had never ceased to cultivate literature with a zeal
not often found in the soldier and politician, and he now beguiled the
tedium of his lot by an entire devotion to those studies which before
had only served to diversify his more active and engrossing pursuits.
Of his poetical talents we have already made short mention; to the end
of life he continued the practice of pouring out his mind in verse,
and there are several well-known and beautiful pieces expressive of
his feelings in prison, and in the anticipation of immediate death;
especially "The Lie," and the beautiful little poem called "The
Pilgrimage." He also possessed a strong turn for mathematics, and
studied them with much success in the society and under the guidance
of his friend, Thomas Hariot, one of the most accomplished
mathematicians of the age. Chemistry was another favorite pursuit, in
which, according to the standard of his contemporaries, he made great
progress. But the most important occupation of his imprisonment was
the composition of the "History of the World." The work extends from
the creation to the end of the second Macedonian war. Raleigh meant to
bring it down to modern times; but the untimely death of Henry, Prince
of Wales, for whose use it was composed, deprived him of the spirit to
proceed with so laborious an undertaking. He enjoyed the confidence of
that generous youth in a remarkable degree, and maintained a close
correspondence with him on civil, military, and naval subjects.
Several discourses on these topics, addressed to the prince, will be
found in the editions of Raleigh's works. Henry repaid these services
with sincere friendship and admiration; and we may presume that his
adviser looked forward to that friendship, not only for a cessation of
misfortune, but for a more brilliant period of favor and power than he
had yet enjoyed. Fortunately, however, his patron's death was preceded
by that of his arch-enemy, Cecil; and through the mediation of the
Duke of Buckingham, Raleigh was released from the Tower in March,
1615; and obtained permission to follow up his long-cherished scheme
of establishing a colony in Guiana, and working a gold mine, of which
he had ascertained the existence and situation.

The results of this disastrous voyage must be shortly given. Raleigh
sailed March 28, 1617, and reached the coast of Guiana in November
following. Being himself disabled by sickness from proceeding farther,
he despatched a party to the mine under the command of Captain Keymis,
an officer who had served in the former voyage to Guiana. But during
the interval which had elapsed since Raleigh's first discovery of
that country, the Spaniards had extended their settlements into it,
and in particular had built a town called Santa Thome in the immediate
neighborhood of the mine in question. James, with his usual duplicity,
while he authorized the expedition, revealed every particular
connected with it to the Spanish ambassador. The English, therefore,
were expected in the Orinoco, and preparation had been made for
repelling them by force. Keymis and his men were unexpectedly attacked
by the garrison of Santa Thome, and a sharp contest ensued, in which
the English gained the advantage, and burnt the town. In this action
Raleigh's eldest son was killed. The Spaniards still occupied the
passes to the mine, and after an unsuccessful attempt to dislodge
them, Keymis abandoned the enterprise and returned to the ships.
Raleigh's correspondence expresses in affecting terms his grief and
indignation at this double misfortune: the loss of a brave and
promising son, and the destruction of the hopes which he had founded
on this long-cherished adventure. On his return to England, he found
himself marked out for a victim to appease the resentment of the
Spanish Court, to which he had long been an object of fear and hatred.

His conduct abroad had already been closely scrutinized, in the hope
of finding some act of piracy, or unauthorized aggression against
Spain, for which he might be brought to trial. Both these hopes
failing, and his death, in compliment to Spain, being resolved on, it
was determined to carry into effect the sentence passed fifteen years
before, from which he had never been legally released; and a warrant
was accordingly issued to the judges, requiring them to order
execution. He insisted on the nature of his late commission, and on
that plea being overruled, submitted with his usual calmness and
dignity. The execution, with indecent haste, was ordered to take place
on the following morning. In this last stage of life, his greatness of
mind shone with even more than its usual lustre. Calm, and fearless
without bravado, his behavior and speech expressed the piety and
resignation of a Christian, with the habitual coolness of one who has
braved death too often to shrink at its approach. His farewell to his
faithful wife was manly, tender, and most affecting. The accounts of
his deportment on the scaffold effectually refute the charges of
irreligion and atheism, which some writers have brought against him,
unless we make up our minds to believe him an accomplished hypocrite.
He spoke at considerable length, and his dying words have been
faithfully reported. They contain a denial of all the serious offences
laid to his charge, and express his forgiveness of those even who had
betrayed him under the mask of friendship. After delivering this
address, and spending some time in prayer, he laid his head on the
block, and breathing a short private prayer, gave the signal to the
executioner. Not being immediately obeyed, he partially raised his
head, and said, "What dost thou fear? Strike, man!" and underwent the
fatal blow without shrinking or alteration of position. He died in his
sixty-sixth year.

[Illustration: Raleigh parting from his wife.]

Raleigh sat in several Parliaments, and took an active part in the
business of the house. His speeches, preserved in the Journals, are
said by Mr. Tytler to be remarkable for an originality and freedom of
thought far in advance of the time. His expression was varied and
animated, and his powers of conversation remarkable. His person was
dignified and handsome, and he excelled in bodily accomplishments and
martial exercises. He was very fond of paintings, and of music; and,
in literature as in art, he possessed a cultivated and correct taste.
He was one of those rare men who seem qualified to excel in all
pursuits alike; and his talents were set off by an extraordinary
laboriousness and capacity of application. As a navigator, soldier,
statesman, and historian, his name is intimately and honorably linked
with one of the most brilliant periods of British history.




MILES STANDISH[19]

By ELBRIDGE S. BROOKS

(1584-1656)

         [Footnote 19: Copyright, 1894, by Selmar Hess.]

[Illustration: Relics of Miles Standish.]


Three hundred years ago the house of Standish was a notable one in
England. The family had numerous possessions; their Lancashire estate
of Duxbury Hall, in the shadow of Rivington Pike and the Pennine
Hills, was pleasant and extensive, and there they had lived for
generations, as there they live to-day. Of this Lancashire home was
that John Standish, "squire to the king," who killed Wat Tyler, the
agitator, on that memorable June day of 1381 when the boy-king of
England, Richard the Second, so pluckily faced his rebellious subjects
on the plain of Smithfield; of it was that Sir John Standish who
fought under the leopard-banner of King Edward at the stone mill of
Crécy; and of it was that gallant soldier Miles Standish, the Puritan
captain, the first commissioned military officer of New England,
famous in American history, song, and story, as the stay and bulwark
of the Pilgrims of Plymouth in their days of struggle and beginning.

Miles Standish (or Myles, as the old spelling has it) was born in
Lancashire, presumably in the family manor house of Duxbury Hall, in
the year 1584. The story of his life is simple. The absolute facts
upon which it is based are meagre, but enough is known to warrant the
assertion that Miles Standish was heir to the name and estates of the
Standishes of Lancashire, from which, by some device not on record, he
was, as he sturdily maintained in his will, "surreptitiously"
defrauded.

At the beginning of the seventeenth century the provinces of the
Netherlands were battling for life against the tyranny of Spain. The
Protestant Elizabeth of England gave help and support to the
Protestant Stadtholder Maurice, and many of her fighting men carried
pike or arquebus at the sack of Cadiz, fought at Nieuport and Ostend,
or served the guns in the great sea-fight off Gibraltar that, in 1607,
broke the power of Spain. Among these fighting-men was young Miles
Standish, and he fought so stoutly and to such good purpose that,
before he was twenty-one he had attained the rank and title of
captain, and was known to Englishmen in the Low Countries as a brave
and gallant soldier. In 1609 came the twelve years' truce between
tired Spain and not less wearied Holland, that gave way in 1621 to the
stubborn and bloody Thirty Years' War. It was, probably, in the early
years of this truce that Captain Miles Standish, a born fighter, went
back to England to battle for his heritage. Not being the match for
the law men in England that he was for Spanish dons in Holland, he was
forced to retire from the unequal contest, defeated but not conquered.
This belief in his rights to the inheritance of the Standishes he
sturdily maintained to the last; for, dying forty years after in the
new land his sword had helped to conquer and his wisdom to found, he
left by his last will and testament unto his son and heir, Alexander:
"Ormistic, Bonsconge, Wrightington, Maudeslay, and the estates in the
Isle of Man"--none of which he nor his descendants were ever to occupy
or hold.

It was after this unsuccessful struggle for his heritage that he
crossed again to Holland and, from some cause not apparent--perhaps
his disgust at English law, perhaps the attractions of one who, later,
became Mistress Rose Standish, may supply the motive--settled among
the self-exiled English folk in Leyden who, because of religious
differences with the established Church, had left their English homes
and, calling themselves Pilgrims because of their wanderings, had made
a settlement in the Dutch city of Leyden, "fair and beautiful and of a
sweet situation."

Although not of the religious faith and following of the Pilgrims of
Leyden--indeed the story runs that the fiery little captain had been,
at one time, a Romanist--he must have been settled among them for
years, for, on the eve of their emigration to America, we find him as
one of their leaders, accepted and commissioned as the military
adviser of the colonists. The time of his life in Leyden was one of
religious unrest in Europe; and in Holland, during that twelve years'
truce with Spain, the theological disputes between Calvinists and
Arminians ran so high as to bring John of Barneald to the scaffold,
and to drive Grotius the scholar into exile. These days of stern
dispute may have had their influence on the sturdy English soldier
living in the midst of Dutch life and Dutch disputations, and made him
lean to the side of Puritanism, even if never openly avowing it as his
religious faith. It is, indeed, a singular fact that the mainstay and
chief protector of the first Puritan colonists of America was neither
of their communion nor of their connection, and is openly censured by
Puritan writers as one who, so says Hubbard, "had been a soldier in
the Low Countries and had never entered the school of our Saviour
Christ or of John the Baptist." But his companions and associates seem
not to have permitted the dissociation to have had special weight with
them. They gladly welcomed Captain Standish and his wife, Rose, among
the little company of exiles that set out from Delft Haven for
Virginia, and gave their names place on that memorable passenger list
of the little schooner Mayflower, which, leaving the harbor of old
Plymouth, in England, in September, 1620, finally dropped anchor in
the harbor of new Plymouth, in New England, in December following.

From the outset of this novel "adventure"--itself a turning-point in
American history--this soldier of fortune was given place and
prominence in the councils of a community which seems to have enlisted
his support, not so much on its religious as on its adventurous side;
and to this "dissenter from dissent" was intrusted the defence of a
company of religious enthusiasts, sailing upon what they deemed a
divine mission, only in the practical side of which did their military
adviser find occupation or interest.

The up-bringing of Miles Standish had been such as to fit him for
leadership, and this he assumed early in the history of the
enterprise. Even on the deck of the Mayflower, he was recognized as
one whose counsels were wise and whose actions were inspiring, and
when in the cabin of the Mayflower, in the harbor of Provincetown, the
famous compact was drawn up, said to be "the first written
constitution in the world," the bold signature of "Myles Standish" was
the clearest of the forty-one Pilgrim autographs that were affixed to
that famous document. It was Captain Standish who, with his sixteen
"well-armed men," made a thorough exploration of the Provincetown
peninsula; he organized and headed the party of observation which,
later, sailed the shallop and marched with watchful eyes along the
shores of Cape Cod, seeking the best place for settlement; and, on
December 6th following, he sailed with a picked party across
Massachusetts Bay and, in much peril and with many adventures, spied
out the land and determined upon the harbor of Plymouth as the best
spot for permanent settlement. It was to Captain Standish's knowledge
as to the best locations and to his skill as a surveyor, that the
colonists were indebted for the selection of their town site and the
laying-out of their town; as, later, the same skill came in play when
were laid out the new towns that followed after the Plymouth
beginnings. Through all that dreary and dreadful first winter, when
half their number died, Captain Standish was their mainstay, as one
whose word was ever reassuring and whose arm was as ready for
protection as was his brain for planning methods of defence. Though
his wife, Mistress Rose Standish, was one of the early victims of that
bitter winter of death, his courage never faltered, his vigilance
never slackened. And when, in the midst of all the peril and
suffering, in February, 1621, Miles Standish was appointed military
captain of the colony, confidence was restored and courage renewed in
the bosoms of that suffering but heroic and indomitable band; so that
when spring came and the Mayflower sailed for England, not one of the
settlers returned in her, nor would desert the cause to which they had
pledged themselves.

It is customary to credit the final success of the Pilgrims of
Plymouth to the religious element that held sway over them, making
them patient, persistent, uncompromising, faithful, and earnest. But
the wisdom of Carver, the genius of Bradford, the fervor of Brewster,
the zeal of Winslow, would have been of small avail had they not been
backed by the decision, the resolution, the courage, the constancy,
and the forethought of their brave captain, Miles Standish, "the John
Smith of New England" as he has been called, the man of helpful
measures and of iron nerves, who could "hew down forests and live on
crumbs."

From first to last he was the loyal supporter and trusty defender of
the Plymouth colony. No danger unnerved him, no duty staggered him.
With but eight men he started out, in 1623, to overawe and subdue the
Indians of Massachusetts--then an unknown and perplexing quantity;
single-handed he checked the conspiracy at Weymouth and turned the
tables upon the savage plotters, by himself assassinating the
assassins--a deed that saved the colony from Indian massacre, but
called forth the mild protest of the Pilgrim preacher at Leyden, Mr.
Robinson, who wrote of it: "Concerning the killing of these poor
Indians, oh! how happy a thing had it been, if you had converted some
before you had killed any.... Let me be bold to exhort you seriously
to consider of the disposition of your captain, whom I love. There is
cause to fear that by occasion, especially of provocation, there may
be wanting (in him) that tenderness of the life of man which is meet."
But the Pilgrims of Plymouth seem not to have questioned the decisive
measures of the man who knew when and how to act in their defence.
Alone he faced the roystering Morton at Merrymount, unarming that
vaporing rebel and putting his riotous colony upon its good behavior.
He led out the forty men of Plymouth enlisted for the Pequot War,
headed the expedition that in 1635, sailed against the encroaching
French in Penobscot Bay, and, as late as 1653, when "very auncient and
full of dolorous paines," expressed himself as ready to take the
command intrusted to him when the colony forces were about to enter
upon a struggle for the right of occupation of the Connecticut country
with the Dutch colonists of Manhattan.

He never refused any burden however heavy nor shirked any duty however
onerous; he cheerfully yielded obedience to the civil power, never
exceeding his orders, nor rashly assuming responsibilities, nor
leading his men upon unwise ventures. While always the military
commander of the colony, his counsel and help were counted as equally
valuable in matters of administration. He served repeatedly as one of
the governor's council; he was at one time assistant-governor or
deputy, and, from 1644 to 1649, was treasurer of the Plymouth colony.
He went to England as the envoy of the colonists in 1625, and in the
midst of plague, of evil times and of bitter jealousies, withstood the
tyranny of the London traders who owned the Pilgrims' labor; and
braving both heavy debt and the possibility of censure, bought out the
traders' rights in the name of his associates.

[Illustration: Departure of the Mayflower.]

The personal descriptions of this remarkable man that have come down
to us, show him as a man of small stature, quick-tempered, choleric,
sturdy and bluff. "As a little chimney is soon fired," wrote the
Puritan historian Hubbard, "so was the Plymouth captain, a man of
very little stature, yet of a very hot and angry temper." And yet his
relations with such men as the noble Bradford, the blameless Brewster,
the politic Winslow, were so close and of so personal a character that
one can hardly accept unquestioningly the story of his hot and
unreasoning temper. He was a soldier and a fighter; but he loved peace
and quiet, and his life was full of friendly offices and of kindly
deeds. On Nantasket Beach he built the first "house of refuge" and
life-saving station in America. He was a gentle nurse in the winter of
sickness, a friend and adviser to those in trouble or distress, a
loving father in the days when parents were not unfrequently tyrants,
and a forgiving spirit, as the old story of his famous "courtship"
(with sufficient foundation to warrant its acceptance) amply proves.

The communism of the early Pilgrim days gave place in time to personal
possession and, as the colony grew, certain of those who had been
leaders desired more extended holdings. Captain Standish was one of
these, and despite his friend Bradford's protests, he moved across the
bay and in 1632 occupied a large and fertile stretch north of
Plymouth, to which, still clinging to his old claim of a stolen
heritage, he gave the name of Duxbury. Here in the midst of peaceful
pursuits, but ever ready to obey the colony's call for counsel or for
leadership, he lived for over twenty years, dying October 3, 1656, at
the age of seventy-two.

A notable figure in American history, Miles Standish is a type of that
mingled spirit of adventure, liberty, and distrust that impelled
emigration across the sea and, combined with the uncompromising stand
for freedom of conscience, founded and up-built the Pilgrim Colony of
Plymouth.

His existence among these Pilgrims is in itself an anomaly. But it is
one of those strange associations and unfaltering friendships that
have left their mark for good upon the world since the days when the
Roman fighting-man stood stanchly by the side of the Christian
proselyte even to the death.

Tradition says that Miles Standish was buried between two pointed
stones in the graveyard of South Duxbury, but the question of his
burial-place is still unsettled. The tall shaft, rising from the crest
of Captain's Hill in Duxbury, and surmounted with a statue of the
famous colonial captain, fitly commemorates a life that has won a
place in the American heart that only grows stronger and more enduring
as time goes on.

[Signature of the author.]




ALBRECHT VON WALLENSTEIN

By HENRY G. HEWLETT

(1583-1634)

[Illustration: Albrecht von Wallenstein. [TN]]


The declaration of the great founder of Christianity that he "came not
to bring peace, but a sword," receives its completest justification in
the history of Europe during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
Ignorant of the constitution of the human mind, and blind to the
absurdity of attempting to enforce opinion, the adherents of the old
and of the reformed faith, during these two hundred years, scarcely
sheathed their swords. The offenders, it is just to say, were
generally, but by no means invariably, the Catholics; and the
retaliation of the Protestants was seldom inferior in ferocity to the
offence received. The "Thirty Years' War" was the bloodiest, as
happily it was the last, scene in this great religious tragedy. The
greatest Catholic leader of this period was Wallenstein.

After a term of peace, consequent on the Diet of Augsburg in 1555,
which secured toleration to Protestantism in Germany, persecution
recommenced in 1578, under the weak Emperor Rudolph II. His cousin
Ferdinand, Duke of Styria, a pupil of the Jesuits, was the most deadly
foe of Protestantism, which had taken deepest root in Bohemia and
Transylvania. The incapacity and bigotry of the emperor at last
provoked his subjects to bring about his deposition, and, in 1610, he
was forced to abdicate in favor of his brother Matthias. He, though
himself tolerant, unwisely committed the government to Ferdinand,
whose tyranny in ordering the destruction of the Protestant churches
in Bohemia, led to the expulsion of his officers and the Jesuits, in
May, 1618, and the commencement of the Thirty Years' War. Matthias
died in the following year, and Ferdinand was elected emperor.

In 1619 the name of Wallenstein first became prominent. Albrecht von
Waldstein, as he was properly called, was the third son of a Bohemian
baron, of old family, and was born in September, 1583. As a boy, he
displayed signs of a singularly proud and independent temper, and
foreshowed his bent by the delight which he took in the society of
military men. His family was Protestant; but having lost his parents
when quite young, he was educated, by the wish of his guardians, at
the Jesuit college of Olmutz, and soon changed his faith. In Italy,
where he next studied, he made great advances in mathematics, law,
languages, and the delusive science of astrology, in which he was a
firm believer ever afterward. On his return to Germany, he fought in
the imperial army against the Turks, who invaded Hungary. He had
considerable estates in Bohemia, which were increased by his marriage,
in 1606, with a rich Moravian widow, who died in 1614, and left him
her property. In the peaceful occupation of farming he spent several
years, and acquired great wealth by his skill and economy. In 1617, he
took part in a campaign against the republic of Venice, with which
Ferdinand had quarreled, and, on the termination of the war in the
same year, was ennobled as Count. The lavish generosity of Wallenstein
during this war greatly endeared him to the army.

Such was his popularity that in 1619, on the Bohemian revolution
breaking out, he was offered by the insurgents the command of their
army, although a Catholic. But he steadily refused the offer, and
warmly espoused the imperial cause, upon which the Bohemians
confiscated his estates. He, however, soon retrieved his fortunes by a
second rich marriage, and the favor of the emperor. The Bohemians,
under their heroic leaders, the Counts von Mansfeldt and Thurn,
ventured to march upon Vienna, and threaten Ferdinand in his capital;
but Wallenstein, on June 10, 1619, gained a signal victory over their
army, and saved his master's throne. In the following year the
Bohemians and Hungarians formally renounced their allegiance; the
former setting up Frederick, Elector-Count Palatine of the Rhine, as
their king; and the latter, Bethlem Gabor, Prince of Transylvania.
Frederick, who was the son-in-law of James I. of England, was as unfit
to govern as his father-in-law, and spent his time in a frivolous
parade of his rank. He obtained but a doubtful support from the
Protestant princes in Germany, who were jealous of his popularity.
Ferdinand, assisted by Spain and other Catholic powers, sent a large
force into Bohemia, under the command of Maximilian, Duke of Bavaria,
and totally routed Frederick's army at Prague,--the king fleeing to
Breslau, and thence to Holland. The Palatinate was then declared
forfeited to the Empire, and was devastated by the Spanish commander,
Spinola. Wallenstein, during this campaign, spent his treasures in the
imperial cause with the utmost readiness and liberality, and obtained
as a reward the lordship of Friedland, which brought him a large
revenue. To this he added by the purchase of several forfeited estates
in Bohemia, and thus became possessed of immense wealth. In 1621-23 he
distinguished himself by defeating Bethlem Gabor, the new King of
Hungary, and forcing him to surrender his claim to the crown. For this
service Wallenstein was created Duke of Friedland.

A cruel persecution of the Protestants in Bohemia and Silesia
dishonored the emperor's success; and the attempt of his officers in
Austria to suppress Lutheranism by force, produced a revolution in
1625. It was put down by the energy of Tilly and Pappenheim, two of
the greatest generals of their day. The Count von Mansfeldt gallantly
upheld the Protestant cause in Westphalia, and other parts of Germany,
but was defeated by Tilly, who imposed Catholicism upon all the
revolted provinces. In their despair the German Protestants applied
for aid to their northern brethren. Gustavus Adolphus, the young and
brave King of Sweden, an ardent champion of the Reformed faith, and
Christian, King of Denmark, responded to their appeal,--the latter
immediately invading the Empire. The imperial finances being
considerably reduced by the war, Ferdinand was glad to avail himself
of an offer made at this crisis by Wallenstein, to levy an army at his
own cost. This offer was abundantly fulfilled. In a few months an army
of 30,000 men was collected, as if by magic. Wallenstein was enviously
suspected of being in league with the devil, but the secret of his
sway was the fascination of his bold and generous nature. He
maintained at once thorough toleration, and strict discipline in his
ranks. These results, however, were not attained without injustice.
Contributions were levied on the most fertile districts, as yet
undesolated by war, to the extent, as it is said, of $60,000,000 in
seven years. His popularity with the army procured him the jealousy of
Tilly, who, in the campaign of 1625-26, outrivalled him, by
successfully combating the invasion of Christian and his Danish
forces, and driving them beyond the Elbe. Wallenstein, nevertheless,
in the following campaign, won his laurels, both as a statesman and a
general, by his intrigues and conquests. Displaying the greatest ardor
in the cause of the Empire, he attempted to render it an absolute
despotism. After routing Count Mansfeldt on the Elbe, he marched into
Hungary, and defeated the united armies of the count and Bethlem
Gabor. Christian of Denmark having assembled a new army in 1628,
Wallenstein marched to meet it; and, by a series of brilliant
successes, recaptured all the towns garrisoned by the Danes, and
forced the king to sue for peace. At the Congress of Lubeck, in May,
1629, this was accorded on favorable terms to Denmark. Wallenstein
during these campaigns astonished his compeers, and excited their
envy, by the wondrous rapidity of his movements, and the skill with
which he surmounted difficulties that seemed insuperable. He was
rewarded with the duchy of Mecklenburg, which was forfeited to the
Empire by the treason of its former owner.

The envious schemes of Tilly and Maximilian, Duke of Bavaria, induced
Ferdinand to remove Wallenstein from his rank of commander in 1630. He
had hardly withdrawn to his Bohemian estates, when Gustavus Adolphus,
who had been hitherto prevented from affording active assistance to
the Protestant party, landed in Pomerania with a small but highly
disciplined army. This illustrious monarch, eminent for virtue and
piety, no less than for political wisdom and military skill, was now
the sole hope of the Reformation in Germany. The princes who professed
its tenets were lukewarm and unready,--divided by jealousies among
themselves, and careless of all but their own worldly interests. He,
on the contrary, was devoted to the cause of his faith, and his solemn
disavowal of personal ambition in undertaking its championship is
stamped with sincerity.

He soon commenced a career of conquest. New Brandenburg and other
districts yielded to his arms, and he formed an alliance with France,
now under the sway of Cardinal Richelieu, which the emperor had vainly
negotiated to prevent. The rich city of Magdeburg declared for him,
and was accordingly besieged by Tilly. The selfishness of the Lutheran
leaders, the Electors of Brandenburg and Saxony, in not responding to
the appeal of the Protestants in the city, led to its fall in 1631,
before Gustavus could reach it. The most atrocious cruelties were
perpetrated by the Catholics at the sack; no consideration of age or
sex availing to prevent the massacre, which lasted for two days, and
extended to 30,000 of the inhabitants. This monstrous crime was
severely avenged by the indignant Gustavus. He forced the Electors of
Brandenburg and Saxony to render him assistance, and, with an
augmented army, hesitated not to give battle to Tilly at Leipsic, and
defeated him September 7, 1631. The Protestants took courage and
joined Gustavus in great numbers. He continued his victorious march,
defeating the enemy at Merseberg, capturing Wurzburg, then advancing
on the Rhine, and reducing on the way Frankfort-on-the-Main, Mentz,
Spires, Mannheim, and other cities. He next turned to Bavaria, where
Tilly and Maximilian entrenched themselves at Rain-on-the-Lech. The
former was killed by a cannon-ball during the siege, in 1632. Gustavus
marched through Augsburg, where the citizens did him homage, and
besieged Munich, which speedily surrendered. He now threatened to
subdue Bavaria and Austria, when his progress was stopped from an
unexpected quarter.

The emperor, justly mistrusting the loyalty of Maximilian, who was in
league with France, now saw himself deprived of his ablest generals,
and felt his power failing. He turned to Wallenstein as the only man
who could save the Empire. That leader was meantime living in
retirement, and secretly glad of the success of Gustavus. He refused
at first to take the command of the imperial army, and only consented
at last on condition of having sole and absolute authority, with the
right of disposing as he pleased of his conquests. These humiliating
terms were accepted by Ferdinand, and in a few months after the death
of Tilly, Wallenstein was in the field with a large and powerful army,
raised, as before, by his own exertions. He drove the Saxons from
Bohemia, and thence marched to Leipsic, which capitulated. At
Nuremberg, where Gustavus offered him battle, he wisely refused, and
for three months the two camps remained close to each other, each
general trying to exhaust the patience of his adversary, and relying
on the destructive effects of famine and pestilence. Gustavus was
forced to withdraw, after losing 20,000 men; a yet heavier loss,
nevertheless, having befallen Wallenstein, whose numbers were better
able to bear it.

Gustavus marched southward, but soon returned to attack Wallenstein,
who had moved northward, and was pillaging the neighborhood of
Leipsic. The two armies met at Lutzen on November 6, 1632. A dense fog
shrouded the movements of each side from the other, and created a
fearful confusion. Wallenstein ranged his infantry in squares, having
a ditch in front, and flanked by his cavalry. Gustavus headed his men
and charged the enemy across the ditch. But his own infantry was borne
down by the black cuirassiers of Wallenstein, and, as he turned to
attack them, the thick fog concealed their approach. His horse was
wounded, and he himself had his arm broken. In moving off the field he
was shot in the back, and falling from his saddle was dragged in the
stirrup. He fell into the hands of the cuirassiers, one of whom, as
the Swedes came up to the succor of their king, shot him through the
head. His corpse was discovered after the battle, and honorably
buried. The death of their king caused the deepest affliction to the
Swedes, but aroused instead of enfeebling their courage. A charge of
the Duke of Weimar, one of the Protestant leaders, threw Wallenstein's
infantry and cavalry into disorder. An attempt of the Imperialist
General Pappenheim, who now came up with a reserve to retrieve the
battle, was for a time successful. But as the tide of fortune seemed
turning against the Swedes, a reserve of their own army made a last
desperate charge, carried the ditch which protected Wallenstein's
infantry, and won the day; the Imperialists fleeing in all directions
and their great leader escaping into Bohemia.

Medieval period


Krishna at Goddesss Radharani's feet
Indian women's position in society further deteriorated during the medieval period,[7][14] when Sati, child marriages and a ban on remarriage by widows became part of social life in some communities in India. The Muslim conquest in the Indian subcontinent brought purdah to Indian society. Among the Rajputs of Rajasthan, the Jauhar was practised. In some parts of India, the Devadasis or temple women were sexually exploited. Polygamy was widely practised, especially among Hindu Kshatriya rulers.[23] In many Muslim families, women were restricted to Zenana areas of the house.
In spite of these conditions, some women became prominent in the fields of politics, literature, education and religion.[7] Razia Sultana became the only woman monarch to have ever ruled Delhi. The Gond queen Durgavati ruled for fifteen years before losing her life in a battle with Mughal emperor Akbar's general Asaf Khan in 1564. Chand Bibi defended Ahmednagar against the powerful Mughal forces of Akbar in the 1590s. Jehangir's wife Nur Jehan effectively wielded imperial power, and was recognized as the real power behind the Mughal throne. The Mughal princesses Jahanara and Zebunnissa were well-known poets, and also influenced the ruling powers. Shivaji's mother, Jijabai, was queen regent because of her ability as a warrior and an administrator. In South India, many women administered villages, towns, and divisions, and ushered in new social and religious institutions.[23]
The Bhakti movements tried to restore women's status and questioned certain forms of oppression.[22] Mirabai, a female saint-poet, was one of the most important Bhakti movement figures. Other female saint-poets from this period included Akka Mahadevi, Rami Janabai and Lal Ded. Bhakti sects within Hinduism such as the Mahanubhav, Varkari and many others were principle movements within the Hindu fold openly advocating social justice and equality between men and women.
Immediately following the Bhakti movements, Guru Nanak, the first Guru of Sikhs, preached equality between men and women. He advocated that women be allowed to lead religious assemblies; to lead congregational hymn singing called Kirtan or Bhajan; to become members of religious management committees; to lead armies on the battlefield; to have equality in marriage, and to have equality in Amrit (Baptism). Other Sikh Gurus also preached against the discrimination against women.

This defeat was the death-blow to Wallenstein's fortunate career. The
Swedes continued to carry on the war successfully under the able
minister of Gustavus, Oxenstiern, and the valiant Duke of Weimar.
Meantime Wallenstein, after some slight victories in Saxony and
Silesia, remained inactive. He at the same time assumed an air of
extreme pride and self-sufficiency, which exasperated his enemies and
gave occasion for their slanders. He was accused to Ferdinand of
designing to seize the Empire,--a charge which seemed the more
credible, on account of an offer having been made by France to assist
him in obtaining the Bohemian crown. This proposition, however, he had
firmly refused. The emperor's intention of removing him from the
command of the army having reached his ears, he declared he would
resign, but was persuaded to remain by his officers, who at a great
banquet, all, with wild and perhaps drunken enthusiasm, signed a
promise of inviolable attachment to his person. This, too, was
interpreted by his enemies as a conspiracy against the emperor. His
destruction was resolved on by the Duke of Bavaria and others, among
whom an Italian mercenary general, named Piccolomini, was the most
perfidious and savage. A plot was formed against him by certain
traitors among his own officers,--the names of Devereaux, Butler,
Gordon, and Leslie, to the shame of their nations, appearing in the
list.

On February 25, 1634, an entertainment was given to the whole body of
officers by Gordon, who commanded the castle of Eger, where
Wallenstein was residing. He himself being indisposed, had retired
from the table to his chamber. He was roused by loud cries proceeding
from the mess-room, where his faithful officers were being murdered by
the traitors. He opened the window to inquire the cause of the
disturbance, when Devereaux entered, with thirty Irishmen at his back.
The cowards shrank at the sight of their great general, standing calm
and stern, unarmed, and at their mercy. But Devereaux, a callous and
brutal soldier, in a moment stepped forward, and cried: "Art thou the
traitor who wilt ruin the Empire?" Wallenstein did not speak, but
opened his arms, as if to accept the blow which was aimed at his
heart. He was slain at the age of fifty-one. His wealth was chiefly
shared among his enemies.

[Illustration: Wallenstein's last banquet.]

Though undoubtedly ambitious and intriguing, Wallenstein's alleged
treachery to the emperor, whom he kept informed of all his schemes,
has never been proved, and by many recent historians is disbelieved.
He fell a victim to the jealousy of his rivals, which he augmented by
his own pride. His fall, however, reflects lasting disgrace on the
character of the Emperor Ferdinand, and was justly avenged by the
subsequent humiliation of the German Empire.




GUSTAVUS ADOLPHUS[20]

By HJALMAR HJORTH BOYESEN

(1594-1632)

         [Footnote 20: Copyright, 1894, by Selmar Hess.]

[Illustration: Gustavus Adolphus. [TN]]


There is a theory which has much currency nowadays, that the great
man, being a product of his century, exerts an influence upon his age
which is but vanishing, compared to the influence which the age exerts
upon him. The great man is, according to this view, personally of
small account, except in so far as the tendencies and ideas which are
fermenting in the age find their expression in him. He does not so
much shape the events as he is shaped and moulded by them.

There is scarcely a hero to be found in all the annals of history who
is better qualified to refute this theory than the Swedish king,
Gustavus Adolphus. It would be futile to assert, of course, that he
was an isolated phenomenon, who sprang like Jonah's luxuriant gourd
out of the arid sands of the desert. No, he had deep and intricate
roots in the past of his race and in the soil of his fatherland. But
yet, how far are all the influences which we can trace, from
accounting for the forceful energy, the clear-sighted sagacity, and
the dominant genius of the man! As far as we can judge at this
distance, his personality was the mightiest element that entered into
the dénouement of that bloody world-drama, the Thirty Years' War. Had
he been other than he was, had he been a man of less heroic mould, it
would seem that Protestantism must have perished in Central Europe, or
been confined, at least, to England and the Scandinavian North. The
rights of conscience and individual judgment, for which Luther and his
co-reformers had fought so valiantly, would then have succumbed to the
power of authority, as embodied in the Papacy and the Catholic
League; and Germany, after its mighty effort at release, would have
lapsed back into the Middle Ages. To few men the opportunity is
offered to exercise such a far-reaching influence upon the history of
mankind; but fewer still are those who see its full significance, and
seeing it, seize it, and without one look behind march into the storm
and stress of world-shaping events.

Gustavus Adolphus was born December 9, 1594. He was the son of King
Charles IX. of Sweden, and the grandson of the renowned Gustavus Vasa.
He was a precocious child, and it is told (though it appears rather
incredible) that at the age of twelve he spoke Latin, French, German,
Dutch, and Italian with great fluency, besides having a superficial
acquaintance with Polish and Russian. There can be no doubt, however,
that he was well taught, and that he possessed a remarkable facility
in acquiring languages. For all that, he was far from being a bookish
boy. In riding, fencing, and all chivalrous accomplishments he took a
lively interest and exhibited much skill. It was in stormy times that
his boyhood fell, Sweden being at that time involved in frequent wars,
and his father, in order to train him in the duties of a military
commander, took him early into his camp and made him share his
campaigns. Many of the famous captains of that day who had fought in
the Low Countries and in France, were made welcome at the Swedish
court; and the favorite pastime of the young Gustavus was to question
them concerning the battles, sieges, and military exploits in which
they had been engaged.

When Charles IX. died, in 1611, Gustavus, being then seventeen years
old, was declared to be of age and succeeded to the throne. There was
need of an able and resolute man to cope with the many difficulties
which sprang up round about him. In the first place there was one war
with Denmark, already raging; the strained relations with Russia and
Poland threatened to precipitate two more. Norway, which was then
united with Denmark under the same king, was also jealous of Sweden;
and the Norwegian peasantry destroyed at Kringelen, in Guldbrandsdal,
an army of Scottish mercenaries, under the command of Colonel
Sinclair, which was marching to the relief of Gustavus. The Danes had
occupied two important Swedish cities, Calmar and Elfsborg, and being
determined to utilize their advantages to the full, repelled all
overtures for peace. It was of no avail that Gustavus renounced his
title of King of the Laplanders, the assumption of which by his father
had been one of the causes of the war. Christian IV., of Denmark,
continued to push hostilities with unflagging vigor, and several
battles were fought with varying fortunes. In 1612, he set sail with a
fleet of thirty-six vessels for Stockholm, intending to capture the
city. The Swedish fleet, being much inferior in numbers, was forced to
retire under shelter of the fortress of Waxholm, which guards the
access to the capital. In this dire dilemma, Gustavus strained every
nerve to avert the threatened disaster. With a small force, chiefly of
Dalecarlians, he marched day and night, and hastened to Waxholm in the
hope of surprising the Danish fleet which had been detained by adverse
winds. But the enemy, being probably informed of his approach, saw
that their opportunity for capturing the capital was gone, and
returned again to their own coast. Negotiations were now resumed and
peace was concluded in 1613. The Danes were to surrender Calmar
immediately and Elfsborg at the end of six years; the Swedes agreeing
to pay a war indemnity of one million thalers.

The war with Russia, which Gustavus had inherited from his father, had
of late been in a state of suspension. The Swedes had occupied a large
amount of Russian territory, in which were several strong fortresses.
In the confusion which reigned as to the succession, after the
extinction of the ancient house of Rurik, there was a capital chance
of fishing in troubled waters. A strong party in Russia desired to
elect a Swedish prince as sovereign, and actually sent an embassy to
Stockholm to offer the throne to Charles Philip, a younger brother of
Gustavus. But the king did not favor this plan. For four years he
continued the war and secured important advantages. But what was more
valuable than territorial gains, he acquired a wide experience in
strategy and the conduct of campaigns, a habit of dealing promptly
with large questions, and a sharpened judgment of men. In February,
1617, the treaty of peace was signed, Russia ceding to Sweden a large
territory on the east of the Baltic. Gustavus was now in a position to
prosecute with greater energy the war with Poland. Sigismund III., of
Poland, was the only son of King John III., of Sweden, and was,
therefore, as a scion of the ancient royal house, the legitimate heir
to the Swedish throne. But in the first place he was a Catholic; and
in the second place, the house of Vasa, had by force of arms and with
the support of the people, successfully asserted its right to the
crown which Gustavus I. had won.

After repeated extensions of the armistice which by common consent
prevailed, the King of Sweden resumed hostilities in July, 1621; and
the war raged with varying success until September, 1629, when another
armistice was concluded for six years. The chief result of this
exhausting warfare was the stipulation which was agreed to, that
liberty of conscience should be granted to Protestants and Catholics,
and that the commerce between Poland and Sweden was declared free.

The renown of these wars, two of which had been brought to a
triumphant issue, spread far over Europe; and the Protestant princes
of Germany became aware that there was a great military captain of
their own faith in the Scandinavian North. They were at that time
sorely oppressed, the success of the imperial arms, under Tilly and
Wallenstein, seeming to threaten the very existence of the Reformed
Faith. The Emperor Ferdinand II. was carrying everything with a high
hand after the defeat of King Christian IV. of Denmark, who, with more
courage than success, had undertaken to champion the Protestant cause.
It was in this desperate strait that all eyes turned toward the young
King of Sweden. An appeal was sent to him for aid, in the name of
their common religion; and Gustavus, after a brief hesitation,
accepted the call. He had long watched with deep concern the war of
devastation by which Wallenstein and the scarcely less terrible Tilly
were seeking to destroy the fruits of the Reformation; and it is said
that he had a clear presentiment that sooner or later he would be
drawn into the struggle. Leaving his domestic affairs in the hands of
his friend, the Chancellor Oxenstiern, he embarked in June, 1630, with
a force of but fifteen thousand men, for Germany, and landed on
midsummer day on the island of Usedom, on the coast of Pomerania.

The Emperor Ferdinand professed to be much amused when he heard that
Gustavus Adolphus had invaded his dominions.

"So we have got another kingling on our hands," he exclaimed
mockingly. He was far from foreseeing what trouble he was to have for
eighteen years to come, in getting that kingling and his troops off
his hands.

Gustavus was the first to step upon the German soil, at the
disembarkation; and in the sight of all his army he fell upon his
knees and prayed for the blessing of God upon the vast enterprise
which had been confided to him. As he arose from his prayer, he seized
a spade and began instantly the work upon the intrenchments of the
camp.

If his troops were few in number, it is not to be denied that they
were excellent in quality. Many were hardened veterans from the king's
earlier campaigns; among his recently acquired mercenaries there was a
Scotch brigade, from which he drew many of his best officers. We hear
much during the following years, of Hepburn, Seaton, Leslie, Mackay,
and Monroe, whose names betray their Caledonian origin. You would have
supposed now that the Protestant princes, having secured the aid of
Gustavus, would have made haste to identify themselves with his cause
and to reinforce him with money and troops. But, strange to relate, no
sooner had he landed than they began to grow afraid of him and to ask
themselves whether they might not after all, be able to make more
tolerable terms with the emperor by the sacrifice of their religion,
than with this foreign invader, who, if he was victorious, might
dictate his own terms. Had they not, in other words, jumped from the
frying-pan into the fire?

The two princes who had hitherto been the most prominent champions of
Protestantism in Germany (though both half-hearted and pusillanimous
shufflers) were Gustavus's brother-in-law, the Elector of Brandenburg,
and the Elector of Saxony. They were now doing their best to wriggle
out of their obligations, and by a shameful neutrality avert the
emperor's displeasure. But they had reckoned without their host if
they supposed that Gustavus would lend himself to such a scheme. The
reply which he gave to Herr von Wilmerstorff, who had been sent to him
by the Elector to urge an armistice, was refreshingly plain, while the
argument which accompanied it was completely unanswerable. When
nevertheless the Elector continued to resort to shilly-shallying and
all sorts of ambiguous tactics, Gustavus lost his patience, marched
his army to the gates of Berlin, and compelled him to make his choice
of party once, for all. The treaty of alliance was then signed, on the
Elector's part reluctantly and with a heavy heart; for these two
brothers-in-law were so vastly different, that it was scarcely to be
expected that they would be congenial. Gustavus, though he was not
without personal ambition, was fired with noble zeal for the
Protestant cause, and believed it worthy of any sacrifice, however
great; while the Elector was only bent on saving his own precious
skin and extricating himself with the least possible damage from the
dangerous situation in which he had been caught.

[Illustration: Gustavus Adolphus before the battle of Lutzen.]

With the same promptness with which he had brought his brother-in-law
of Brandenburg to terms, Gustavus forced the hand of the Elector of
Saxony, who now overcame his scruples and sent him the needed
reinforcements. An imperial army of forty thousand men, under the
command of an Italian adventurer named Torquato Conti, had been sent
against him, immediately on his landing in Pomerania, but no battle
had been fought, and beyond laying waste the country the Imperialists
had so far accomplished nothing. The emperor, who had predicted that
"the Snow-king would melt under the rays of the Imperial sun," became
alarmed at his successes and selected Tilly to stay his southward
advance. This able and experienced general promptly assumed the
command of the forces of the Catholic League, and in order to strike
terror into the hearts of the Protestant princes, sacked and pillaged
the city of Magdeburg in Lower Saxony, giving it over without
restraint to devastation and ruin by the brutal soldiery. The horrors
which were here enacted beggar description, and leave a hideous stain
upon the page of history. Tilly himself, in announcing his success to
the emperor, wrote: "Since the destruction of Troy and Jerusalem never
has such a siege been seen."

Gustavus had, indeed, come too late to relieve Magdeburg, but the
report of the unspeakable atrocities which that unhappy city had
witnessed, fired his generous heart with wrath and an eager
determination to punish a general so devoid of humanity. And the
opportunity was soon to present itself. Advancing rapidly into Saxony,
he met Tilly on the plains of Breitenfeld, near Leipsic, September 7,
1631; and not only defeated him, but utterly annihilated his army,
scattering it like dust before the storm. He was now, until a new army
could be raised, master of all Germany. Nothing apparently could have
hindered him from marching on Vienna and dictating to the emperor his
own terms of peace. It has been and is yet a matter of speculation,
why Gustavus did not relentlessly follow up the results of this great
victory, instead of going into winter quarters and affording Ferdinand
and the discomfited princes of the League a chance of recovering from
their utter demoralization. The answer is, no doubt, that he did not
feel himself strong enough to lay siege to Vienna, without covering
his rear and securing his base of supplies. He had always, like the
good general he was, been careful to keep open a possible line of
retreat. For the moment he was indeed irresistible. At Merseburg two
thousand Imperialists were cut to pieces. Cities opened their gates to
receive him. The Protestant population, in their ecstacy at his
victories, were ready to worship him as a demigod. Proceeding
southward to Nuremberg and Munich, he was met again by Tilly at the
river Lech, where a brief battle was fought; Gustavus was again
victorious and Tilly lost his life. This feat of crossing the Lech in
the face of a hostile force is by military experts regarded as the
greatest strategic feat of Gustavus.

In the meanwhile the emperor had not been idle. There was but one man
whose name was potent enough to summon an army adequate for so
perilous a situation; and that man was Albrecht von Wallenstein. He
was himself, too, fully aware of his preciousness and the terms which
he exacted of Ferdinand were hard, not to say extortionate. Ferdinand
II., however, had no choice but to accept them. It was not long before
Gustavus became aware that Wallenstein, with an army which seemed to
have risen out of the ground, was moving in his rear, resolved,
apparently, to cut him off from his communication with Sweden. He had
no alternative then but to return northward to face this new enemy. On
the field of Lutzen in Saxony they met November 6, 1632. A thick mist
covered the battle-field, and both armies tarried with the attack in
the hope that it would lift. Toward noon, however, Gustavus made a
brief address to his soldiers and knelt in prayer before them,
whereupon all sang Luther's hymn, "Our God he is a fortress strong."
Then the signal was given for the attack. The army of Gustavus,
including his German allies, numbered from twenty to twenty-five
thousand, and the Imperialists about thirty thousand. The king, who
suffered from an imperfectly healed wound which he had received in the
Polish war, found it painful to wear a cuirass; and on the morning of
the day of Lutzen refused to put it on. "God is my armor," he said,
and mounted his horse.

It was this sublime confidence in divine Providence which led him
perhaps to expose himself overmuch. He led the attack in person.
Before the battle was far advanced, a report reached him that his left
wing was wavering. With prompt resolution he started across the field,
but, mistaking the direction in the fog, found himself in the midst of
a detachment of imperial cuirassiers. A pistol shot pierced his arm;
but he still pressed on. Growing faint from pain and loss of blood, he
turned to one of the German princes who accompanied him and said:
"Cousin, lead me out of this tumult; for I am hurt."

But scarcely had he spoken, when a second shot hit him between the
shoulders and he fell from his horse, dead.

The rumor instantly spread through the Swedish army that the king had
been taken prisoner. The troops rushed like an avalanche upon the
Imperialists, who wavered and gave way. In the end the victory was
claimed by both sides, the advantage remaining however with the
Swedes.

Gustavus Adolphus was a man of handsome appearance, tall of stature,
and of most impressive presence. He was hot-tempered; but at the same
time kindly, generous, and affable. He possessed all the qualities
required of a military leader, and has justly been accounted one of
the world's greatest generals. He was thirty-eight years old at the
time of his death. Having no son, he was succeeded on the Swedish
throne by his daughter Christina.

[Signature of the author.]





End of Project Gutenberg's Great Men and Famous Women. Vol. 1 of 8, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GREAT MEN, FAMOUS WOMEN, VOL. 1 ***

***** This file should be named 26421-8.txt or 26421-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/4/2/26421/

Produced by Sigal Alon, Christine P. Travers and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



His education as a child consisted in memorizing many verses of the
Bible, the "Three R's," and wood-craft. His childhood was strenuous. In
his mother's arms he saw the burning of the town of New Ulm, which was
the funeral pyre for the women and children of that place when they were
massacred by Red Cloud and his braves.

On another occasion Fred's mother fled for her life from the Indians,
carrying the boy with her. He was a husky lad, and knowing that if she
tried to carry him farther they both would be overtaken, she hid him
under a shock of corn. There, the next morning, the Indians having been
driven off, she found her son sleeping as soundly as a night watchman.
In these Indian wars, and the Civil War which followed, of the families
of Burnham and Russell, twenty-two of the men were killed. There is no
question that Burnham comes of fighting stock.

In 1870, when Fred was nine years old, his father moved to Los Angeles,
Cal., where two years later he died; and for a time for both mother and
boy there was poverty, hard and grinding. To relieve this young Burnham
acted as a mounted messenger. Often he was in the saddle from twelve to
fifteen hours, and even in a land where every one rode well, he gained
local fame as a hard rider. In a few years a kind uncle offered to Mrs.
Burnham and a younger brother a home in the East, but at the last moment
Fred refused to go with them, and chose to make his own way. He was then
thirteen years old, and he had determined to be a scout.

At that particular age many boys have set forth determined to be scouts,
and are generally brought home the next morning by a policeman. But
Burnham, having turned his back on the cities, did not repent. He
wandered over Mexico, Arizona, California. He met Indians, bandits,
prospectors, hunters of all kinds of big game; and finally a scout who,
under General Taylor, had served in the Mexican War. This man took a
liking to the boy; and his influence upon him was marked and for his
good. He was an educated man, and had carried into the wilderness a few
books. In the cabin of this man Burnham read "The Conquest of Mexico
and Peru" by Prescott, the lives of Hannibal and Cyrus the Great, of
Livingstone the explorer, which first set his thoughts toward Africa,
and many technical works on the strategy and tactics of war. He had no
experience of military operations on a large scale, but, with the aid of
the veteran of the Mexican War, with corn-cobs in the sand in front of
the cabin door, he constructed forts and made trenches, redoubts,
and traverses. In Burnham's life this seems to have been a very happy
period. The big game he hunted and killed he sold for a few dollars to
the men of Nadean's freight outfits, which in those days hauled bullion
from Cerro Gordo for the man who is now Senator Jones of Nevada.

At nineteen Burnham decided that there were things in this world he
should know that could not be gleaned from the earth, trees, and sky;
and with the few dollars he had saved he came East. The visit apparently
was not a success. The atmosphere of the town in which he went to school
was strictly Puritanical, and the townspeople much given to religious
discussion. The son of the pioneer missionary found himself unable to
subscribe to the formulas which to the others seemed so essential, and
he returned to the West with the most bitter feelings, which lasted
until he was twenty-one.

"It seems strange now," he once said to me, "but in those times
religious questions were as much a part of our daily life as to-day are
automobiles, the Standard Oil, and the insurance scandals, and when I
went West I was in an unhappy, doubting frame of mind. The trouble was
I had no moral anchors; the old ones father had given me were gone, and
the time for acquiring new ones had not arrived." This bitterness of
heart, or this disappointment, or whatever the state of mind was that
the dogmas of the New England town had inspired in the boy from the
prairie, made him reckless. For the life he was to lead this was not a
handicap. Even as a lad, in a land-grant war in California, he had been
under gunfire, and for the next fifteen years he led a life of danger
and of daring; and studied in a school of experience than which, for a
scout, if his life be spared, there can be none better. Burnham came
out of it a quiet, manly, gentleman. In those fifteen years he roved the
West from the Great Divide to Mexico. He fought the Apache Indians for
the possession of waterholes, he guarded bullion on stage-coaches, for
days rode in pursuit of Mexican bandits and American horse thieves,
took part in county-seat fights, in rustler wars, in cattle wars; he was
cowboy, miner, deputy-sheriff, and in time throughout the the name of
"Fred" Burnham became significant and familiar.

During this period Burnham was true to his boyhood ideal of becoming a
scout. It was not enough that by merely living the life around him he
was being educated for it. He daily practised and rehearsed those things
which some day might mean to himself and others the difference between
life and death. To improve his sense of smell he gave up smoking, of
which he was extremely fond, nor, for the same reason, does he to this
day use tobacco. He accustomed himself also to go with little sleep, and
to subsist on the least possible quantity of food. As a deputy-sheriff
this educated faculty of not requiring sleep aided him in many important
captures. Sometimes he would not strike the trail of the bandit or "bad
man" until the other had several days the start of him. But the end
was the same; for, while the murderer snatched a few hours' rest by the
trail, Burnham, awake and in the saddle, would be closing up the miles
between them.

That he is a good marksman goes without telling. At the age of eight his
father gave him a rifle of his own, and at twelve, with either a "gun"
or a Winchester, he was an expert. He taught himself to use a weapon
either in his left or right hand and to shoot, Indian fashion, hanging
by one leg from his pony and using it as a cover, and to turn in the
saddle and shoot behind him. I once asked him if he really could shoot
to the rear with a galloping horse under him and hit a man.

"Well," he said, "maybe not to hit him, but I can come near enough to
him to make him decide my pony's so much faster than his that it really
isn't worth while to follow me."

Besides perfecting himself in what he tolerantly calls "tricks" of
horsemanship and marksmanship, he studied the signs of the trail, forest
and prairie, as a sailing-master studies the waves and clouds. The
knowledge he gathers from inanimate objects and dumb animals seems
little less than miraculous. And when you ask him how he knows these
things he always gives you a reason founded on some fact or habit of
nature that shows him to be a naturalist, mineralogist, geologist, and
botanist, and not merely a seventh son of a seventh son.

In South Africa he would say to the officers: "There are a dozen Boers
five miles ahead of us riding Basuto ponies at a trot, and leading five
others. If we hurry we should be able to sight them in an hour." At
first the officers would smile, but not after a half-hour's gallop, when
they would see ahead of them a dozen Boers leading five ponies. In the
early days of Salem, Burnham would have been burned as a witch.

When twenty-three years of age he married Miss Blanche Blick, of Iowa.
They had known each other from childhood, and her brothers-in-law have
been Burnham's aids and companions in every part of Africa and the West.
Neither at the time of their marriage nor since did Mrs. Burnham "lay
a hand on the bridle rein," as is witnessed by the fact that for nine
years after his marriage Burnham continued his career as sheriff, scout,
mining prospector. And in 1893, when Burnham and his brother-in-law,
Ingram, started for South Africa, Mrs. Burnham went with them, and
in every part of South Africa shared her husband's life of travel and
danger.

In making this move across the sea, Burnham's original idea was to look
for gold in the territory owned by the German East African Company. But
as in Rhodesia the first Matabele uprising had broken out, he continued
on down the coast, and volunteered for that campaign. This was the real
beginning of his fortunes. The "war" was not unlike the Indian fighting
of his early days, and although the country was new to him, with
the kind of warfare then being waged between the Kaffirs under King
Lobengula and the white settlers of the British South Africa Company,
the chartered company of Cecil Rhodes, he was intimately familiar.

It does not take big men long to recognize other big men, and Burnham's
remarkable work as a scout at once brought him to the notice of Rhodes
and Dr. Jameson, who was personally conducting the campaign. The war was
their own private war, and to them, at such a crisis in the history of
their settlement, a man like Burnham was invaluable.

The chief incident of this campaign, the fame of which rang over all
Great Britain and her colonies, was the gallant but hopeless stand made
by Major Alan Wilson and his patrol of thirty-four men. It was Burnham's
attempt to save these men that made him known from Buluwayo to Cape
Town.

King Lobengula and his warriors were halted on one bank of the Shangani
River, and on the other Major Forbes, with a picked force of three
hundred men, was coming up in pursuit. Although at the moment he did
not know it, he also was being pursued by a force of Matabeles, who were
gradually surrounding him. At nightfall Major Wilson and a patrol of
twelve men, with Burnham and his brother-in-law, Ingram, acting as
scouts, were ordered to make a dash into the camp of Lobengula and, if
possible, in the confusion of their sudden attack, and under cover of a
terrific thunder-storm that was raging, bring him back a prisoner.

With the king in their hands the white men believed the rebellion would
collapse. To the number of three thousand the Matabeles were sleeping in
a succession of camps, through which the fourteen men rode at a gallop.
But in the darkness it was difficult to distinguish the trek wagon of
the king, and by the time they found his laager the Matabeles from the
other camps through which they had ridden had given the alarm. Through
the underbrush from every side the enemy, armed with assegai and
elephant guns, charged toward them and spread out to cut off their
retreat.

At a distance of about seven hundred yards from the camps there was
a giant ant-hill, and the patrol rode toward it. By the aid of the
lightning flashes they made their way through a dripping wood and over
soil which the rain had turned into thick black mud. When the party
drew rein at the ant-hill it was found that of the fourteen three were
missing. As the official scout of the patrol and the only one who could
see in the dark, Wilson ordered Burnham back to find them. Burnham said
he could do so only by feeling the hoof-prints in the mud and that he
would like some one with him to lead his pony. Wilson said he would lead
it. With his fingers Burnham followed the trail of the eleven horses to
where, at right angles, the hoof-prints of the three others separated
from it, and so came upon the three men. Still, with nothing but the mud
of the jungle to guide him, he brought them back to their comrades. It
was this feat that established his reputation among British, Boers, and
black men in South Africa.

Throughout the night the men of the patrol lay in the mud holding the
reins of their horses. In the jungle about them, they could hear the
enemy splashing through the mud, and the swishing sound of the branches
as they swept back into place. It was still raining. Just before
the dawn there came the sounds of voices and the welcome clatter of
accoutrements. The men of the patrol, believing the column had joined
them, sprang up rejoicing, but it was only a second patrol, under
Captain Borrow, who had been sent forward with twenty men as
re-enforcements. They had come in time to share in a glorious
immortality. No sooner had these men joined than the Kaffirs began the
attack; and the white men at once learned that they were trapped in a
complete circle of the enemy. Hidden by the trees, the Kaffirs fired
point-blank, and in a very little time half of Wilson's force was
killed or wounded. As the horses were shot down the men used them for
breastworks. There was no other shelter. Wilson called Burnham to him
and told him he must try and get through the lines of the enemy to
Forbes.

"Tell him to come up at once," he said; "we are nearly finished." He
detailed a trooper named Gooding and Ingram to accompany Burnham.
"One of you may get through," he said. Gooding was but lately out from
London, and knew nothing of scouting, so Burnham and Ingram warned him,
whether he saw the reason for it or not, to act exactly as they did.
The three men had barely left the others before the enemy sprang at them
with their spears. In five minutes they were being fired at from every
bush. Then followed a remarkable ride, in which Burnham called to his
aid all he had learned in thirty years of border warfare. As the enemy
rushed after them, the three doubled on their tracks, rode in triple
loops, hid in dongas to breathe their horses; and to scatter their
pursuers, separated, joined again, and again separated. The enemy
followed them to the very bank of the river, where, finding the "drift"
covered with the swollen waters, they were forced to swim. They reached
the other bank only to find Forbes hotly engaged with another force of
the Matabeles.

"I have been sent for re-enforcements," Burnham said to Forbes, "but I
believe we are the only survivors of that party." Forbes himself was too
hard pressed to give help to Wilson, and Burnham, his errand over, took
his place in the column, and began firing upon the new enemy.

Six weeks later the bodies of Wilson's patrol were found lying in a
circle. Each of them had been shot many times. A son of Lobengula, who
witnessed their extermination, and who in Buluwayo had often heard the
Englishmen sing their national anthem, told how the five men who were
the last to die stood up and, swinging their hats defiantly, sang "God
Save the Queen." The incident will long be recorded in song and story;
and in London was reproduced in two theatres, in each of which the
man who played "Burnham, the American Scout," as he rode off for
re-enforcements, was as loudly cheered by those in the audience as by
those on the stage.

Hensman, in his "History of Rhodesia," says: "One hardly knows which to
most admire, the men who went on this dangerous errand, through brush
swarming with natives, or those who remained behind battling against
overwhelming odds."

For his help in this war the Chartered Company presented Burnham with
the campaign medal, a gold watch engraved with words of appreciation;
and at the suggestion of Cecil Rhodes gave him, Ingram, and the Hon.
Maurice Clifford, jointly, a tract of land of three hundred square
acres.

After this campaign Burnham led an expedition of ten white men and
seventy Kaffirs north of the Zambesi River to explore Barotzeland
and other regions to the north of Mashonaland, and to establish the
boundaries of the concession given him, Ingram, and Clifford.

In order to protect Burnham on the march the Chartered Company signed
a treaty with the native king of the country through which he wished
to travel, by which the king gave him permission to pass freely and
guaranteed him against attack.

But Latea, the son of the king, refused to recognize the treaty and sent
his young men in great numbers to surround Burnham's camp. Burnham had
been instructed to avoid a fight, and was torn between his desire to
obey the Chartered Company and to prevent a massacre. He decided to make
it a sacrifice either of himself or of Latea. As soon as night fell,
with only three companions and a missionary to act as a witness of what
occurred, he slipped through the lines of Latea's men, and, kicking
down the fence around the prince's hut, suddenly appeared before him and
covered him with his rifle.

"Is it peace or war?" Burnham asked. "I have the king your father's
guarantee of protection, but your men surround us. I have told my people
if they hear shots to open fire. We may all be killed, but you will be
the first to die."

The missionary also spoke urging Latea to abide by the treaty. Burnham
says the prince seemed much more impressed by the arguments of the
missionary than by the fact that he still was covered by Burnham's
rifle. Whichever argument moved him, he called off his warriors. On
this expedition Burnham discovered the ruins of great granite structures
fifteen feet wide, and made entirely without mortar. They were of a
period dating before the Phoenicians. He also sought out the ruins
described to him by F. C. Selous, the famous hunter, and by Rider
Haggard as King Solomon's Mines. Much to the delight of Mr. Haggard,
he brought back for him from the mines of his imagination real gold
ornaments and a real gold bar.

On this same expedition, which lasted five months, Burnham endured one
of the severest hardships of his life. Alone with ten Kaffir boys, he
started on a week's journey across the dried-up basin of what once had
been a great lake. Water was carried in goat-skins on the heads of the
bearers. The boys, finding the bags an unwieldy burden, and believing,
with the happy optimism of their race, that Burnham's warnings were
needless, and that at a stream they soon could refill the bags, emptied
the water on the ground.

The tortures that followed this wanton waste were terrible. Five of
the boys died, and after several days, when Burnham found water in
abundance, the tongues of the others were so swollen that their jaws
could not meet.

On this trip Burnham passed through a region ravaged by the "sleeping
sickness," where his nostrils were never free from the stench of dead
bodies, where in some of the villages, as he expressed it, "the hyenas
were mangy with overeating, and the buzzards so gorged they could
not move out of our way." From this expedition he brought back many
ornaments of gold manufactured before the Christian era, and made
several valuable maps of hitherto uncharted regions. It was in
recognition of the information gathered by him on this trip that he was
elected a Fellow of the Royal Geographical Society.

He returned to Rhodesia in time to take part in the second Matabele
rebellion. This was in 1896. By now Burnham was a very prominent
member of the "vortrekers" and pioneers at Buluwayo, and Sir Frederick
Carrington, who was in command of the forces, attached him to his staff.
This second outbreak was a more serious uprising than the one of 1893,
and as it was evident the forces of the Chartered Company could not
handle it, imperial troops were sent to assist them. But with even their
aid the war dragged on until it threatened to last to the rainy season,
when the troops must have gone into winter quarters. Had they done so,
the cost of keeping them would have fallen on the Chartered Company,
already a sufferer in pocket from the ravages of the rinderpest and the
expenses of the investigation which followed the Jameson raid.

Accordingly, Carrington looked about for some measure by which he could
bring the war to an immediate end.

It was suggested to him by a young Colonial, named Armstrong, the
Commissioner of the district, that this could be done by destroying
the "god," or high priest, Umlimo, who was the chief inspiration of the
rebellion.

This high priest had incited the rebels to a general massacre of women
and children, and had given them confidence by promising to strike the
white soldiers blind and to turn their bullets into water. Armstrong
had discovered the secret hiding-place of Umlimo, and Carrington ordered
Burnham to penetrate the enemy's lines, find the god, capture him, and
if that were not possible to destroy him.

The adventure was a most desperate one. Umlimo was secreted in a cave
on the top of a huge kopje. At the base of this was a village where were
gathered two regiments, of a thousand men each, of his fighting men.

For miles around this village the country was patrolled by roving bands
of the enemy.

Against a white man reaching the cave and returning, the chances were a
hundred to one, and the difficulties of the journey are illustrated by
the fact that Burnham and Armstrong were unable to move faster than at
the rate of a mile an hour. In making the last mile they consumed three
hours. When they reached the base of the kopje in which Umlimo was
hiding, they concealed their ponies in a clump of bushes, and on hands
and knees began the ascent.

Directly below them lay the village, so close that they could smell the
odors of cooking from the huts, and hear, rising drowsily on the hot,
noonday air, voices of the warriors. For minutes at a time they lay as
motionless as the granite bowlders around or squirmed and crawled over
loose stones which a miss of hand or knee would have dislodged and sent
clattering into the village. After an hour of this tortuous climbing
the cave suddenly opened before them, and they beheld Umlimo.
Burnham recognized that to take him alive from his stronghold was an
impossibility, and that even they themselves would leave the place was
equally doubtful. So, obeying orders, he fired, killing the man who had
boasted he would turn the bullets of his enemies into water. The echo of
the shot aroused the village as would a stone hurled into an ant-heap.
In an instant the veldt below was black with running men, and as,
concealment being no longer possible, the white men rose to fly a great
shout of anger told them they were discovered. At the same moment two
women, returning from a stream where they had gone for water, saw the
ponies, and ran screaming to give the alarm. The race that followed
lasted two hours, for so quickly did the Kaffirs spread out on every
side that it was impossible for Burnham to gain ground in any one
direction, and he was forced to dodge, turn, and double. At one time
the white men were driven back to the very kopje from which the race had
started.

But in the end they evaded assegai and gunfire, and in safety reached
Buluwayo. This exploit was one of the chief factors in bringing the war
to a close. The Matabeles, finding their leader was only a mortal like
themselves, and so could not, as he had promised, bring miracles to
their aid, lost heart, and when Cecil Rhodes in person made overtures of
peace, his terms were accepted. During the hard days of the siege, when
rations were few and bad, Burnham's little girl, who had been the first
white child born in Buluwayo, died of fever and lack of proper
food. This with other causes led him to leave Rhodesia and return to
California. It is possible he then thought he had forever turned
his back on South Africa, but, though he himself had departed, the
impression he had made there remained behind him.

Burnham did not rest long in California. In Alaska the hunt for gold had
just begun, and, the old restlessness seizing him, he left Pasadena and
her blue skies, tropical plants, and trolley-car strikes for the new raw
land of the Klondike. With Burnham it has always been the place that is
being made, not the place in being, that attracts. He has helped to make
straight the ways of several great communities--Arizona, California,
Rhodesia, Alaska, and Uganda. As he once said: "It is the constructive
side of frontier life that most appeals to me, the building up of a
country, where you see the persistent drive and force of the white man;
when the place is finally settled I don't seem to enjoy it very long."

In Alaska he did much prospecting, and, with a sled and only two dogs,
for twenty-four days made one long fight against snow and ice, covering
six hundred miles. In mining in Alaska he succeeded well, but against
the country he holds a constant grudge, because it kept him out of the
fight with Spain. When war was declared he was in the wilds and knew
nothing of it, and though on his return to civilization he telegraphed
Colonel Roosevelt volunteering for the Rough Riders, and at once started
south, by the time he had reached Seattle the war was over.

Several times has he spoken to me of how bitterly he regretted missing
this chance to officially fight for his country. That he had twice
served with English forces made him the more keen to show his loyalty to
his own people.

That he would have been given a commission in the Rough Riders seems
evident from the opinion President Roosevelt has publicly expressed of
him.

"I know Burnham," the President wrote in 1901. "He is a scout and a
hunter of courage and ability, a man totally without fear, a sure shot,
and a fighter. He is the ideal scout, and when enlisted in the military
service of any country he is bound to be of the greatest benefit."

The truth of this Burnham was soon to prove.

In 1899 he had returned to the Klondike, and in January of 1900 had been
six months in Skagway. In that same month Lord Roberts sailed for
Cape Town to take command of the army, and with him on his staff was
Burnham's former commander, Sir Frederick, now Lord, Carrington. One
night as the ship was in the Bay of Biscay, Carrington was talking of
Burnham and giving instances of his marvellous powers as a "tracker."

"He is the best scout we ever had in South Africa!" Carrington declared.

"Then why don't we get him back there?" said Roberts.

What followed is well known.

From Gibraltar a cable was sent to Skagway, offering Burnham the
position, created especially for him, of chief of scouts of the British
army in the field.

Probably never before in the history of wars has one nation paid so
pleasant a tribute to the abilities of a man of another nation.

The sequel is interesting. The cablegram reached Skagway by the steamer
_City of Seattle_. The purser left it at the post-office, and until two
hours and a half before the steamer was listed to start on her return
trip, there it lay. Then Burnham, in asking for his mail, received it.
In two hours and a half he had his family, himself, and his belongings
on board the steamer, and had started on his half-around-the-world
journey from Alaska to Cape Town.

A Skagway paper of January 5, 1900, published the day after Burnham
sailed, throws a side light on his character. After telling of his hasty
departure the day before, and of the high compliment that had been paid
to "a prominent Skagwayan," it adds: "Although Mr. Burnham has lived in
Skagway since last August, and has been North for many months, he has
said little of his past, and few have known that he is the man famous
over the world as 'the American scout' of the Matabele wars."

Many a man who went to the Klondike did not, for reasons best known to
himself, talk about his past. But it is characteristic of Burnham that,
though he lived there two years, his associates did not know, until the
British Government snatched him from among them, that he had not always
been a prospector like themselves.

I was on the same ship that carried Burnham the latter half of his
journey, from Southampton to Cape Town, and every night for seventeen
nights was one of a group of men who shot questions at him. And it was
interesting to see a fellow-countryman one had heard praised so highly
so completely make good. It was not as though he had a credulous
audience of commercial tourists. Among the officers who each evening
gathered around him were Colonel Gallilet of the Egyptian cavalry,
Captain Frazer commanding the Scotch Gillies, Captain Mackie of Lord
Roberts's staff, each of whom was later killed in action; Colonel Sir
Charles Hunter of the Royal Rifles, Major Bagot, Major Lord Dudley, and
Captain Lord Valentia. Each of these had either held command in border
fights in India or the Sudan or had hunted big game, and the questions
each asked were the outcome of his own experience and observation.

Not for a single evening could a faker have submitted to the midnight
examination through which they put Burnham and not have exposed his
ignorance. They wanted to know what difference there is in a column of
dust raised by cavalry and by trek wagons, how to tell whether a horse
that has passed was going at a trot or a gallop, the way to throw a
diamond hitch, how to make a fire without at the same time making a
target of yourself, how--why--what--and how?

And what made us most admire Burnham was that when he did not know he at
once said so.

Within two nights he had us so absolutely at his mercy that we would
have followed him anywhere; anything he chose to tell us, we would have
accepted. We were ready to believe in flying foxes, flying squirrels,
that wild turkeys dance quadrilles--even that you must never sleep in
the moonlight. Had he demanded: "Do you believe in vampires?" we would
have shouted "Yes." To ask that a scout should on an ocean steamer prove
his ability was certainly placing him under a severe handicap.

As one of the British officers said: "It's about as fair a game as
though we planted the captain of this ship in the Sahara Desert, and
told him to prove he could run a ten-thousand-ton liner."

Burnham continued with Lord Roberts to the fall of Pretoria, when he was
invalided home.

During the advance north he was a hundred times inside the Boer laagers,
keeping Headquarters Staff daily informed of the enemy's movements; was
twice captured and twice escaped.

He was first captured while trying to warn the British from the fatal
drift at Thaba'nchu. When reconnoitring alone in the morning mist he
came upon the Boers hiding on the banks of the river, toward which the
English were even then advancing. The Boers were moving all about him,
and cut him off from his own side. He had to choose between abandoning
the English to the trap or signalling to them, and so exposing himself
to capture. With the red kerchief the scouts carried for that purpose he
wigwagged to the approaching soldiers to turn back, that the enemy were
awaiting them. But the column, which was without an advance guard, paid
no attention to his signals and plodded steadily on into the ambush,
while Burnham was at once made prisoner. In the fight that followed he
pretended to receive a wound in the knee and bound it so elaborately
that not even a surgeon would have disturbed the carefully arranged
bandages. Limping heavily and groaning with pain, he was placed in
a trek wagon with the officers who really were wounded, and who, in
consequence, were not closely guarded. Burnham told them who he was and,
as he intended to escape, offered to take back to head-quarters their
names or any messages they might wish to send to their people. As
twenty yards behind the wagon in which they lay was a mounted guard, the
officers told him escape was impossible. He proved otherwise. The trek
wagon was drawn by sixteen oxen and driven by a Kaffir boy. Later in the
evening, but while it still was moonlight, the boy descended from his
seat and ran forward to belabor the first spans of oxen. This was the
opportunity for which Burnham had been waiting.

Slipping quickly over the driver's seat, he dropped between the two
"wheelers" to the disselboom, or tongue, of the trek wagon. From this he
lowered himself and fell between the legs of the oxen on his back in the
road. In an instant the body of the wagon had passed over him, and while
the dust still hung above the trail he rolled rapidly over into the
ditch at the side of the road and lay motionless.

It was four days before he was able to re-enter the British lines,
during which time he had been lying in the open veldt, and had subsisted
on one biscuit and two handfuls of "mealies," or what we call Indian
corn.

Another time when out scouting he and his Kaffir boy while on foot were
"jumped" by a Boer commando and forced to hide in two great ant-hills.
The Boers went into camp on every side of them, and for two days,
unknown to themselves, held Burnham a prisoner. Only at night did he and
the Cape boy dare to crawl out to breathe fresh air and to eat the food
tablets they carried in their pockets. On five occasions was Burnham
sent into the Boer lines with dynamite cartridges to blow up the
railroad over which the enemy was receiving supplies and ammunition. One
of these expeditions nearly ended his life.

On June 2, 1901, while trying by night to blow up the line between
Pretoria and Delagoa Bay, he was surrounded by a party of Boers and
could save himself only by instant flight. He threw himself Indian
fashion along the back of his pony, and had all but got away when a
bullet caught the horse and, without even faltering in its stride, it
crashed to the ground dead, crushing Burnham beneath it and knocking him
senseless. He continued unconscious for twenty-four hours, and when he
came to, both friends and foes had departed. Bent upon carrying out his
orders, although suffering the most acute agony, he crept back to the
railroad and destroyed it. Knowing the explosion would soon bring the
Boers, on his hands and knees he crept to an empty kraal, where for
two days and nights he lay insensible. At the end of that time he
appreciated that he was sinking and that unless he found aid he would
die.

Accordingly, still on his hands and knees, he set forth toward the sound
of distant firing. He was indifferent as to whether it came from the
enemy or his own people, but, as it chanced, he was picked up by a
patrol of General Dickson's Brigade, who carried him to Pretoria. There
the surgeons discovered that in his fall he had torn apart the muscles
of the stomach and burst a blood-vessel. That his life was saved, so
they informed him, was due only to the fact that for three days he had
been without food. Had he attempted to digest the least particle of the
"staff of life" he would have surely died. His injuries were so serious
that he was ordered home.

On leaving the army he was given such hearty thanks and generous rewards
as no other American ever received from the British War Office. He was
promoted to the rank of major, presented with a large sum of money, and
from Lord Roberts received a personal letter of thanks and appreciation.

In part the Field-Marshal wrote: "I doubt if any other man in the force
could have successfully carried out the thrilling enterprises in which
from time to time you have been engaged, demanding as they did the
training of a lifetime, combined with exceptional courage, caution, and
powers of endurance." On his arrival in England he was commanded to dine
with the Queen and spend the night at Osborne, and a few months later,
after her death, King Edward created him a member of the Distinguished
Service Order, and personally presented him with the South African
medal with five bars, and the cross of the D. S. O. While recovering
his health Burnham, with Mrs. Burnham, was "passed on" by friends he had
made in the army from country house to country house; he was made the
guest of honor at city banquets, with the Duke of Rutland rode after the
Belvoir hounds, and in Scotland made mild excursions after grouse. But
after six months of convalescence he was off again, this time to the
hinterland of Ashanti, on the west coast of Africa, where he went in the
interests of a syndicate to investigate a concession for working gold
mines.

With his brother-in-law, J. C. Blick, he marched and rowed twelve
hundred miles, and explored the Volta River, at that date so little
visited that in one day's journey they counted eleven hippopotamuses. In
July, 1901, he returned from Ashanti, and a few months later an unknown
but enthusiastic admirer asked in the House of Commons if it were
true Major Burnham had applied for the post of Instructor of Scouts at
Aldershot. There is no such post, and Burnham had not applied for
any other post. To the Timer he wrote: "I never have thought myself
competent to teach Britons how to fight, or to act as an instructor
with officers who have fought in every corner of the world. The question
asked in Parliament was entirely without my knowledge, and I deeply
regret that it was asked." A few months later, with Mrs. Burnham and his
younger son, Bruce, he journeyed to East Africa as director of the East
African Syndicate.

During his stay there the _African Review_ said of him: "Should East
Africa ever become a possession for England to be proud of, she will owe
much of her prosperity to the brave little band that has faced hardships
and dangers in discovering her hidden resources. Major Burnham has
chosen men from England, Ireland, the United States, and South Africa
for sterling qualities, and they have justified his choice. Not the
least like a hero is the retiring, diffident little major himself,
though a finer man for a friend or a better man to serve under would not
be found in the five continents."

Burnham explored a tract of land larger than Germany, penetrating a
thousand miles through a country, never before visited by white men,
to the borders of the Congo Basin. With him he had twenty white men and
five hundred natives. The most interesting result of the expedition
was the discovery of a lake forty-nine miles square, composed almost
entirely of pure carbonate of soda, forming a snowlike crust so thick
that on it the men could cross the lake.

It is the largest, and when the railroad is built--the Uganda Railroad
is now only eighty-eight miles distant--it will be the most valuable
deposit of carbonate of soda ever found.

A year ago, in the interests of John Hays Hammond, the distinguished
mining engineer of South Africa and this country, Burnham went to
Sonora, Mexico, to find a buried city and to open up mines of copper and
silver.

Besides seeking for mines, Hammond and Burnham, with Gardner Williams,
another American who also made his fortune in South Africa, are working
together on a scheme to import to this country at their own expense many
species of South African deer.

The South African deer is a hardy animal and can live where the American
deer cannot, and the idea in importing him is to prevent big game in
this country from passing away. They have asked Congress to set aside
for these animals a portion of the forest reserve. Already Congress has
voted toward the plan $15,000, and President Roosevelt is one of its
most enthusiastic supporters.

We cannot leave Burnham in better hands than those of Hammond and
Gardner Williams. Than these three men the United States has not sent to
British Africa any Americans of whom she has better reason to be proud.
Such men abroad do for those at home untold good. They are the real
ambassadors of their country.

The last I learned of Burnham is told in the snapshot of him which
accompanies this article, and which shows him, barefoot, in the Yaqui
River, where he has gone, perhaps, to conceal his trail from the
Indians. It came a month ago in a letter which said briefly that when
the picture was snapped the expedition was "trying to cool off." There
his narrative ended. Promising as it does adventures still to come, it
seems a good place in which to leave him.

Meanwhile, you may think of Mrs. Burnham after a year in Mexico keeping
the house open for her husband's return to Pasadena, and of their first
son, Roderick, studying woodcraft with his father, forestry with Gifford
Pinchot, and playing right guard on the freshman team at the University
of California.

But Burnham himself we will leave "cooling off" in the Yaqui River,
maybe, with Indians hunting for him along the banks. And we need not
worry about him. We know they will not catch him.





End of Project Gutenberg's Real Soldiers of Fortune, by Richard Harding Davis

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REAL SOLDIERS OF FORTUNE ***

***** This file should be named 3029.txt or 3029.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/2/3029/

Produced by David Reed, and Ronald J. Wilson

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg EBook of Famous Affinities of History V1, by Lyndon Orr

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Famous Affinities of History V1
       The Romance of Devotion

Author: Lyndon Orr

Posting Date: August 24, 2009 [EBook #4689]
Release Date: November, 2003
First Posted: March 3, 2002

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FAMOUS AFFINITIES OF HISTORY V1 ***




Produced by Robert Rowe, Charles Franks and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team. HTML version by Al Haines.










FAMOUS AFFINITIES OF HISTORY


THE ROMANCE OF DEVOTION


BY

LYNDON ORR



VOLUME I OF IV.





CONTENTS


  THE STORY OF ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA
  ABELARD AND HELOISE
  QUEEN ELIZABETH AND THE EARL OF LEICESTER
  MARY QUEEN OF SCOTS AND LORD BOTHWELL
  QUEEN CHRISTINA OF SWEDEN AND THE MARQUIS MONALDESCHI
  KING CHARLES II. AND NELL GWYN
  MAURICE OF SAXONY AND ADRIENNE LECOUVREUR
  THE STORY OF PRINCE CHARLES EDWARD STUART




THE STORY OF ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA


Of all love stories that are known to human history, the love story of
Antony and Cleopatra has been for nineteen centuries the most
remarkable. It has tasked the resources of the plastic and the graphic
arts. It has been made the theme of poets and of prose narrators. It
has appeared and reappeared in a thousand forms, and it appeals as much
to the imagination to-day as it did when Antony deserted his almost
victorious troops and hastened in a swift galley from Actium in pursuit
of Cleopatra.

The wonder of the story is explained by its extraordinary nature. Many
men in private life have lost fortune and fame for the love of woman.
Kings have incurred the odium of their people, and have cared nothing
for it in comparison with the joys of sense that come from the
lingering caresses and clinging kisses. Cold-blooded statesmen, such as
Parnell, have lost the leadership of their party and have gone down in
history with a clouded name because of the fascination exercised upon
them by some woman, often far from beautiful, and yet possessing the
mysterious power which makes the triumphs of statesmanship seem slight
in comparison with the swiftly flying hours of pleasure.

But in the case of Antony and Cleopatra alone do we find a man flinging
away not merely the triumphs of civic honors or the headship of a
state, but much more than these--the mastery of what was practically
the world--in answer to the promptings of a woman's will. Hence the
story of the Roman triumvir and the Egyptian queen is not like any
other story that has yet been told. The sacrifice involved in it was so
overwhelming, so instantaneous, and so complete as to set this
narrative above all others. Shakespeare's genius has touched it with
the glory of a great imagination. Dryden, using it in the finest of his
plays, expressed its nature in the title "All for Love."

The distinguished Italian historian, Signor Ferrero, the author of many
books, has tried hard to eliminate nearly all the romantic elements
from the tale, and to have us see in it not the triumph of love, but
the blindness of ambition. Under his handling it becomes almost a
sordid drama of man's pursuit of power and of woman's selfishness. Let
us review the story as it remains, even after we have taken full
account of Ferrero's criticism. Has the world for nineteen hundred
years been blinded by a show of sentiment? Has it so absolutely been
misled by those who lived and wrote in the days which followed closely
on the events that make up this extraordinary narrative?

In answering these questions we must consider, in the first place, the
scene, and, in the second place, the psychology of the two central
characters who for so long a time have been regarded as the very
embodiment of unchecked passion.

As to the scene, it must be remembered that the Egypt of those days was
not Egyptian as we understand the word, but rather Greek. Cleopatra
herself was of Greek descent. The kingdom of Egypt had been created by
a general of Alexander the Great after that splendid warrior's death.
Its capital, the most brilliant city of the Greco-Roman world, had been
founded by Alexander himself, who gave to it his name. With his own
hands he traced out the limits of the city and issued the most
peremptory orders that it should be made the metropolis of the entire
world. The orders of a king cannot give enduring greatness to a city;
but Alexander's keen eye and marvelous brain saw at once that the site
of Alexandria was such that a great commercial community planted there
would live and flourish throughout out succeeding ages. He was right;
for within a century this new capital of Egypt leaped to the forefront
among the exchanges of the world's commerce, while everything that art
could do was lavished on its embellishment.

Alexandria lay upon a projecting tongue of land so situated that the
whole trade of the Mediterranean centered there. Down the Nile there
floated to its gates the barbaric wealth of Africa. To it came the
treasures of the East, brought from afar by caravans--silks from China,
spices and pearls from India, and enormous masses of gold and silver
from lands scarcely known. In its harbor were the vessels of every
country, from Asia in the East to Spain and Gaul and even Britain in
the West.

When Cleopatra, a young girl of seventeen, succeeded to the throne of
Egypt the population of Alexandria amounted to a million souls. The
customs duties collected at the port would, in terms of modern money,
amount each year to more than thirty million dollars, even though the
imposts were not heavy. The people, who may be described as Greek at
the top and Oriental at the bottom, were boisterous and
pleasure-loving, devoted to splendid spectacles, with horse-racing,
gambling, and dissipation; yet at the same time they were an artistic
people, loving music passionately, and by no means idle, since one part
of the city was devoted to large and prosperous manufactories of linen,
paper, glass, and muslin.

To the outward eye Alexandria was extremely beautiful. Through its
entire length ran two great boulevards, shaded and diversified by
mighty trees and parterres of multicolored flowers, amid which
fountains plashed and costly marbles gleamed. One-fifth of the whole
city was known as the Royal Residence. In it were the palaces of the
reigning family, the great museum, and the famous library which the
Arabs later burned. There were parks and gardens brilliant with
tropical foliage and adorned with the masterpieces of Grecian
sculpture, while sphinxes and obelisks gave a suggestion of Oriental
strangeness. As one looked seaward his eye beheld over the blue water
the snow-white rocks of the sheltering island, Pharos, on which was
reared a lighthouse four hundred feet in height and justly numbered
among the seven wonders of the world. Altogether, Alexandria was a city
of wealth, of beauty, of stirring life, of excitement, and of pleasure.
Ferrero has aptly likened it to Paris--not so much the Paris of to-day
as the Paris of forty years ago, when the Second Empire flourished in
all its splendor as the home of joy and strange delights.

Over the country of which Alexandria was the capital Cleopatra came to
reign at seventeen. Following the odd custom which the Greek dynasty of
the Ptolemies had inherited from their Egyptian predecessors, she was
betrothed to her own brother. He, however, was a mere child of less
than twelve, and was under the control of evil counselors, who, in his
name, gained control of the capital and drove Cleopatra into exile.
Until then she had been a mere girl; but now the spirit of a woman who
was wronged blazed up in her and called out all her latent powers.
Hastening to Syria, she gathered about herself an army and led it
against her foes.

But meanwhile Julius Caesar, the greatest man of ancient times, had
arrived at Alexandria backed by an army of his veterans. Against him no
resistance would avail. Then came a brief moment during which the
Egyptian king and the Egyptian queen each strove to win the favor of
the Roman imperator. The king and his advisers had many arts, and so
had Cleopatra. One thing, however, she possessed which struck the
balance in her favor, and this was a woman's fascination.

According to the story, Caesar was unwilling to receive her. There came
into his presence, as he sat in the palace, a group of slaves bearing a
long roll of matting, bound carefully and seeming to contain some
precious work of art. The slaves made signs that they were bearing a
gift to Caesar. The master of Egypt bade them unwrap the gift that he
might see it. They did so, and out of the wrapping came Cleopatra--a
radiant vision, appealing, irresistible. Next morning it became known
everywhere that Cleopatra had remained in Caesar's quarters through the
night and that her enemies were now his enemies. In desperation they
rushed upon his legions, casting aside all pretense of amity. There
ensued a fierce contest, but the revolt was quenched in blood.

This was a crucial moment in Cleopatra's life. She had sacrificed all
that a woman has to give; but she had not done so from any love of
pleasure or from wantonness. She was queen of Egypt, and she had
redeemed her kingdom and kept it by her sacrifice. One should not
condemn her too severely. In a sense, her act was one of heroism like
that of Judith in the tent of Holofernes. But beyond all question it
changed her character. It taught her the secret of her own great power.
Henceforth she was no longer a mere girl, nor a woman of the ordinary
type. Her contact with so great a mind as Caesar's quickened her
intellect. Her knowledge that, by the charms of sense, she had mastered
even him transformed her into a strange and wonderful creature. She
learned to study the weaknesses of men, to play on their emotions, to
appeal to every subtle taste and fancy. In her were blended mental
power and that illusive, indefinable gift which is called charm.

For Cleopatra was never beautiful. Signor Ferrero seems to think this
fact to be discovery of his own, but it was set down by Plutarch in a
very striking passage written less than a century after Cleopatra and
Antony died. We may quote here what the Greek historian said of her:

Her actual beauty was far from being so remarkable that none could be
compared with her, nor was it such that it would strike your fancy when
you saw her first. Yet the influence of her presence, if you lingered
near her, was irresistible. Her attractive personality, joined with the
charm of her conversation, and the individual touch that she gave to
everything she said or did, were utterly bewitching. It was delightful
merely to hear the music of her voice, with which, like an instrument
of many strings, she could pass from one language to another.

Caesar had left Cleopatra firmly seated on the throne of Egypt. For six
years she reigned with great intelligence, keeping order in her
dominions, and patronizing with discrimination both arts and letters.
But ere long the convulsions of the Roman state once more caused her
extreme anxiety. Caesar had been assassinated, and there ensued a
period of civil war. Out of it emerged two striking figures which were
absolutely contrasted in their character. One was Octavian, the adopted
son of Caesar, a man who, though still quite young and possessed of
great ability, was cunning, cold-blooded, and deceitful. The other was
Antony, a soldier by training, and with all a soldier's bluntness,
courage, and lawlessness.

The Roman world was divided for the time between these two men, Antony
receiving the government of the East, Octavian that of the West. In the
year which had preceded this division Cleopatra had wavered between the
two opposite factions at Rome. In so doing she had excited the
suspicion of Antony, and he now demanded of her an explanation.

One must have some conception of Antony himself in order to understand
the events that followed. He was essentially a soldier, of excellent
family, being related to Caesar himself. As a very young man he was
exceedingly handsome, and bad companions led him into the pursuit of
vicious pleasure. He had scarcely come of age when he found that he
owed the enormous sum of two hundred and fifty talents, equivalent to
half a million dollars in the money of to-day. But he was much more
than a mere man of pleasure, given over to drinking and to dissipation.
Men might tell of his escapades, as when he drove about the streets of
Rome in a common cab, dangling his legs out of the window while he
shouted forth drunken songs of revelry. This was not the whole of
Antony. Joining the Roman army in Syria, he showed himself to be a
soldier of great personal bravery, a clever strategist, and also humane
and merciful in the hour of victory.

Unlike most Romans, Antony wore a full beard. His forehead was large,
and his nose was of the distinctive Roman type. His look was so bold
and masculine that people likened him to Hercules. His democratic
manners endeared him to the army. He wore a plain tunic covered with a
large, coarse mantle, and carried a huge sword at his side, despising
ostentation. Even his faults and follies added to his popularity. He
would sit down at the common soldiers' mess and drink with them,
telling them stories and clapping them on the back. He spent money like
water, quickly recognizing any daring deed which his legionaries
performed. In this respect he was like Napoleon; and, like Napoleon, he
had a vein of florid eloquence which was criticized by literary men,
but which went straight to the heart of the private soldier. In a word,
he was a powerful, virile, passionate, able man, rough, as were nearly
all his countrymen, but strong and true.

It was to this general that Cleopatra was to answer, and with a firm
reliance on the charms which had subdued Antony's great commander,
Caesar, she set out in person for Cilicia, in Asia Minor, sailing up
the river Cydnus to the place where Antony was encamped with his army.
Making all allowance for the exaggeration of historians, there can be
no doubt that she appeared to him like some dreamy vision. Her barge
was gilded, and was wafted on its way by swelling sails of Tyrian
purple. The oars which smote the water were of shining silver. As she
drew near the Roman general's camp the languorous music of flutes and
harps breathed forth a strain of invitation.

Cleopatra herself lay upon a divan set upon the deck of the barge
beneath a canopy of woven gold. She was dressed to resemble Venus,
while girls about her personated nymphs and Graces. Delicate perfumes
diffused themselves from the vessel; and at last, as she drew near the
shore, all the people for miles about were gathered there, leaving
Antony to sit alone in the tribunal where he was dispensing justice.

Word was brought to him that Venus had come to feast with Bacchus.
Antony, though still suspicious of Cleopatra, sent her an invitation to
dine with him in state. With graceful tact she sent him a
counter-invitation, and he came. The magnificence of his reception
dazzled the man who had so long known only a soldier's fare, or at most
the crude entertainments which he had enjoyed in Rome. A marvelous
display of lights was made. Thousands upon thousands of candles shone
brilliantly, arranged in squares and circles; while the banquet itself
was one that symbolized the studied luxury of the East.

At this time Cleopatra was twenty-seven years of age--a period of life
which modern physiologists have called the crisis in a woman's growth.
She had never really loved before, since she had given herself to
Caesar, not because she cared for him, but to save her kingdom. She now
came into the presence of one whose manly beauty and strong passions
were matched by her own subtlety and appealing charm.

When Antony addressed her he felt himself a rustic in her presence.
Almost resentful, he betook himself to the coarse language of the camp.
Cleopatra, with marvelous adaptability, took her tone from his, and
thus in a moment put him at his ease. Ferrero, who takes a most
unfavorable view of her character and personality, nevertheless
explains the secret of her fascination:

Herself utterly cold and callous, insensitive by nature to the flame of
true devotion, Cleopatra was one of those women gifted with an unerring
instinct for all the various roads to men's affections. She could be
the shrinking, modest girl, too shy to reveal her half-unconscious
emotions of jealousy and depression and self-abandonment, or a woman
carried away by the sweep of a fiery and uncontrollable passion. She
could tickle the esthetic sensibilities of her victims by rich and
gorgeous festivals, by the fantastic adornment of her own person and
her palace, or by brilliant discussions on literature and art; she
could conjure up all their grossest instincts with the vilest
obscenities of conversation, with the free and easy jocularity of a
woman of the camps.

These last words are far too strong, and they represent only Ferrero's
personal opinion; yet there is no doubt that she met every mood of
Antony's so that he became enthralled with her at once. No such woman
as this had ever cast her eyes on him before. He had a wife at home--a
most disreputable wife--so that he cared little for domestic ties.
Later, out of policy, he made another marriage with the sister of his
rival, Octavian, but this wife he never cared for. His heart and soul
were given up to Cleopatra, the woman who could be a comrade in the
camp and a fount of tenderness in their hours of dalliance, and who
possessed the keen intellect of a man joined to the arts and
fascinations of a woman.

On her side she found in Antony an ardent lover, a man of vigorous
masculinity, and, moreover, a soldier whose armies might well sustain
her on the throne of Egypt. That there was calculation mingled with her
love, no one can doubt. That some calculation also entered into
Antony's affection is likewise certain. Yet this does not affect the
truth that each was wholly given to the other. Why should it have
lessened her love for him to feel that he could protect her and defend
her? Why should it have lessened his love for her to know that she was
queen of the richest country in the world--one that could supply his
needs, sustain his armies, and gild his triumphs with magnificence?

There are many instances in history of regnant queens who loved and yet
whose love was not dissociated from the policy of state. Such were Anne
of Austria, Elizabeth of England, and the unfortunate Mary Stuart.
Such, too, we cannot fail to think, was Cleopatra.

The two remained together for ten years. In this time Antony was
separated from her only during a campaign in the East. In Alexandria he
ceased to seem a Roman citizen and gave himself up wholly to the charms
of this enticing woman. Many stories are told of their good fellowship
and close intimacy. Plutarch quotes Plato as saying that there are four
kinds of flattery, but he adds that Cleopatra had a thousand. She was
the supreme mistress of the art of pleasing.

Whether Antony were serious or mirthful, she had at the instant some
new delight or some new charm to meet his wishes. At every turn she was
with him both day and night. With him she threw dice; with him she
drank; with him she hunted; and when he exercised himself in arms she
was there to admire and applaud.

At night the pair would disguise themselves as servants and wander
about the streets of Alexandria. In fact, more than once they were set
upon in the slums and treated roughly by the rabble who did not
recognize them. Cleopatra was always alluring, always tactful, often
humorous, and full of frolic.

Then came the shock of Antony's final breach with Octavian. Either
Antony or his rival must rule the world. Cleopatra's lover once more
became the Roman general, and with a great fleet proceeded to the coast
of Greece, where his enemy was encamped. Antony had raised a hundred
and twelve thousand troops and five hundred ships--a force far superior
to that commanded by Octavian. Cleopatra was there with sixty ships.

In the days that preceded the final battle much took place which still
remains obscure. It seems likely that Antony desired to become again
the Roman, while Cleopatra wished him to thrust Rome aside and return
to Egypt with her, to reign there as an independent king. To her Rome
was almost a barbarian city. In it she could not hold sway as she could
in her beautiful Alexandria, with its blue skies and velvet turf and
tropical flowers. At Rome Antony would be distracted by the cares of
state, and she would lose her lover. At Alexandria she would have him
for her very own.

The clash came when the hostile fleets met off the promontory of
Actium. At its crisis Cleopatra, prematurely concluding that the battle
was lost, of a sudden gave the signal for retreat and put out to sea
with her fleet. This was the crucial moment. Antony, mastered by his
love, forgot all else, and in a swift ship started in pursuit of her,
abandoning his fleet and army to win or lose as fortune might decide.
For him the world was nothing; the dark-browed Queen of Egypt,
imperious and yet caressing, was everything. Never was such a prize and
never were such great hopes thrown carelessly away. After waiting seven
days Antony's troops, still undefeated, finding that their commander
would not return to them, surrendered to Octavian, who thus became the
master of an empire.

Later his legions assaulted Alexandria, and there Antony was twice
defeated. At last Cleopatra saw her great mistake. She had made her
lover give up the hope of being Rome's dictator, but in so doing she
had also lost the chance of ruling with him tranquilly in Egypt. She
shut herself behind the barred doors of the royal sepulcher; and, lest
she should be molested there, she sent forth word that she had died.
Her proud spirit could not brook the thought that she might be seized
and carried as a prisoner to Rome. She was too much a queen in soul to
be led in triumph up the Sacred Way to the Capitol with golden chains
clanking on her slender wrists.

Antony, believing the report that she was dead, fell upon his sword;
but in his dying moments he was carried into the presence of the woman
for whom he had given all. With her arms about him, his spirit passed
away; and soon after she, too, met death, whether by a poisoned draught
or by the storied asp no one can say.

Cleopatra had lived the mistress of a splendid kingdom. She had
successively captivated two of the greatest men whom Rome had ever
seen. She died, like a queen, to escape disgrace. Whatever modern
critics may have to say concerning small details, this story still
remains the strangest love story of which the world has any record.




ABELARD AND HELOISE


Many a woman, amid the transports of passionate and languishing love,
has cried out in a sort of ecstasy:

"I love you as no woman ever loved a man before!"

When she says this she believes it. Her whole soul is aflame with the
ardor of emotion. It really seems to her that no one ever could have
loved so much as she.

This cry--spontaneous, untaught, sincere--has become almost one of
those conventionalities of amorous expression which belong to the
vocabulary of self-abandonment. Every woman who utters it, when torn by
the almost terrible extravagance of a great love, believes that no one
before her has ever said it, and that in her own case it is absolutely
true.

Yet, how many women are really faithful to the end? Very many, indeed,
if circumstances admit of easy faithfulness. A high-souled, generous,
ardent nature will endure an infinity of disillusionment, of
misfortune, of neglect, and even of ill treatment. Even so, the flame,
though it may sink low, can be revived again to burn as brightly as
before. But in order that this may be so it is necessary that the
object of such a wonderful devotion be alive, that he be present and
visible; or, if he be absent, that there should still exist some hope
of renewing the exquisite intimacy of the past.

A man who is sincerely loved may be compelled to take long journeys
which will separate him for an indefinite time from the woman who has
given her heart to him, and she will still be constant. He may be
imprisoned, perhaps for life, yet there is always the hope of his
release or of his escape; and some women will be faithful to him and
will watch for his return. But, given a situation which absolutely bars
out hope, which sunders two souls in such a way that they can never be
united in this world, and there we have a test so terribly severe that
few even of the most loyal and intensely clinging lovers can endure it.

Not that such a situation would lead a woman to turn to any other man
than the one to whom she had given her very life; but we might expect
that at least her strong desire would cool and weaken. She might
cherish his memory among the precious souvenirs of her love life; but
that she should still pour out the same rapturous, unstinted passion as
before seems almost too much to believe. The annals of emotion record
only one such instance; and so this instance has become known to all,
and has been cherished for nearly a thousand years. It involves the
story of a woman who did love, perhaps, as no one ever loved before or
since; for she was subjected to this cruel test, and she met the test
not alone completely, but triumphantly and almost fiercely.

The story is, of course, the story of Abelard and Heloise. It has many
times been falsely told. Portions of it have been omitted, and other
portions of it have been garbled. A whole literature has grown up
around the subject. It may well be worth our while to clear away the
ambiguities and the doubtful points, and once more to tell it simply,
without bias, and with a strict adherence to what seems to be the truth
attested by authentic records.

There is one circumstance connected with the story which we must
specially note. The narrative does something more than set forth the
one quite unimpeachable instance of unconquered constancy. It shows
how, in the last analysis, that which touches the human heart has more
vitality and more enduring interest than what concerns the intellect or
those achievements of the human mind which are external to our
emotional nature.

Pierre Abelard was undoubtedly the boldest and most creative reasoner
of his time. As a wandering teacher he drew after him thousands of
enthusiastic students. He gave a strong impetus to learning. He was a
marvelous logician and an accomplished orator. Among his pupils were
men who afterward became prelates of the church and distinguished
scholars. In the Dark Age, when the dictates of reason were almost
wholly disregarded, he fought fearlessly for intellectual freedom. He
was practically the founder of the University of Paris, which in turn
became the mother of medieval and modern universities.

He was, therefore, a great and striking figure in the history of
civilization. Nevertheless he would to-day be remembered only by
scholars and students of the Middle Ages were it not for the fact that
he inspired the most enduring love that history records. If Heloise had
never loved him, and if their story had not been so tragic and so
poignant, he would be to-day only a name known to but a few. His final
resting-place, in the cemetery of Pere Lachaise, in Paris, would not be
sought out by thousands every year and kept bright with flowers, the
gift of those who have themselves both loved and suffered.

Pierre Abelard--or, more fully, Pierre Abelard de Palais--was a native
of Brittany, born in the year 1079. His father was a knight, the lord
of the manor; but Abelard cared little for the life of a petty noble;
and so he gave up his seigniorial rights to his brothers and went forth
to become, first of all a student, and then a public lecturer and
teacher.

His student days ended abruptly in Paris, where he had enrolled himself
as the pupil of a distinguished philosopher, Guillaume de Champeaux;
but one day Abelard engaged in a disputation with his master. His
wonderful combination of eloquence, logic, and originality utterly
routed Champeaux, who was thus humiliated in the presence of his
disciples. He was the first of many enemies that Abelard was destined
to make in his long and stormy career. From that moment the young
Breton himself set up as a teacher of philosophy, and the brilliancy of
his discourses soon drew to him throngs of students from all over
Europe.

Before proceeding with the story of Abelard it is well to reconstruct,
however slightly, a picture of the times in which he lived. It was an
age when Western Europe was but partly civilized. Pedantry and learning
of the most minute sort existed side by side with the most violent
excesses of medieval barbarism. The Church had undertaken the gigantic
task of subduing and enlightening the semi-pagan peoples of France and
Germany and England.

When we look back at that period some will unjustly censure Rome for
not controlling more completely the savagery of the medievals. More
fairly should we wonder at the great measure of success which had
already been achieved. The leaven of a true Christianity was working in
the half-pagan populations. It had not yet completely reached the
nobles and the knights, or even all the ecclesiastics who served it and
who were consecrated to its mission. Thus, amid a sort of political
chaos were seen the glaring evils of feudalism. Kings and princes and
their followers lived the lives of swine. Private blood-feuds were
regarded lightly. There was as yet no single central power. Every man
carried his life in his hand, trusting to sword and dagger for
protection.

The cities were still mere hamlets clustered around great castles or
fortified cathedrals. In Paris itself the network of dark lanes, ill
lighted and unguarded, was the scene of midnight murder and
assassination. In the winter-time wolves infested the town by night.
Men-at-arms, with torches and spears, often had to march out from their
barracks to assail the snarling, yelping packs of savage animals that
hunger drove from the surrounding forests.

Paris of the twelfth century was typical of France itself, which was
harried by human wolves intent on rapine and wanton plunder. There were
great schools of theology, but the students who attended them fought
and slashed one another. If a man's life was threatened he must protect
it by his own strength or by gathering about him a band of friends. No
one was safe. No one was tolerant. Very few were free from the grosser
vices. Even in some of the religious houses the brothers would meet at
night for unseemly revels, splashing the stone floors with wine and
shrieking in a delirium of drunkenness. The rules of the Church
enjoined temperance, continence, and celibacy; but the decrees of Leo
IX. and Nicholas II. and Alexander II. and Gregory were only partially
observed.

In fact, Europe was in a state of chaos--political and moral and
social. Only very slowly was order emerging from sheer anarchy. We must
remember this when we recall some facts which meet us in the story of
Abelard and Heloise.

The jealousy of Champeaux drove Abelard for a time from Paris. He
taught and lectured at several other centers of learning, always
admired, and yet at the same time denounced by many for his advocacy of
reason as against blind faith. During the years of his wandering he
came to have a wide knowledge of the world and of human nature. If we
try to imagine him as he was in his thirty-fifth year we shall find in
him a remarkable combination of attractive qualities.

It must be remembered that though, in a sense, he was an ecclesiastic,
he had not yet been ordained to the priesthood, but was rather a
canon--a person who did not belong to any religious order, though he
was supposed to live according to a definite set of religious rules and
as a member of a religious community. Abelard, however, made rather
light of his churchly associations. He was at once an accomplished man
of the world and a profound scholar. There was nothing of the recluse
about him. He mingled with his fellow men, whom he dominated by the
charm of his personality. He was eloquent, ardent, and persuasive. He
could turn a delicate compliment as skilfully as he could elaborate a
syllogism. His rich voice had in it a seductive quality which was never
without its effect.

Handsome and well formed, he possessed as much vigor of body as of
mind. Nor were his accomplishments entirely those of the scholar. He
wrote dainty verses, which he also set to music, and which he sang
himself with a rare skill. Some have called him "the first of the
troubadours," and many who cared nothing for his skill in logic admired
him for his gifts as a musician and a poet. Altogether, he was one to
attract attention wherever he went, for none could fail to recognize
his power.

It was soon after his thirty-fifth year that he returned to Paris,
where he was welcomed by thousands. With much tact he reconciled
himself to his enemies, so that his life now seemed to be full of
promise and of sunshine.

It was at this time that he became acquainted with a very beautiful
young girl named Heloise. She was only eighteen years of age, yet
already she possessed not only beauty, but many accomplishments which
were then quite rare in women, since she both wrote and spoke a number
of languages, and, like Abelard, was a lover of music and poetry.
Heloise was the illegitimate daughter of a canon of patrician blood; so
that she is said to have been a worthy representative of the noble
house of the Montmorencys--famous throughout French history for
chivalry and charm.

Up to this time we do not know precisely what sort of life Abelard had
lived in private. His enemies declared that he had squandered his
substance in vicious ways. His friends denied this, and represented him
as strict and chaste. The truth probably lies between these two
assertions. He was naturally a pleasure-loving man of the world, who
may very possibly have relieved his severer studies by occasional
revelry and light love. It is not at all likely that he was addicted to
gross passions and low practices.

But such as he was, when he first saw Heloise he conceived for her a
violent attachment. Carefully guarded in the house of her uncle,
Fulbert, it was difficult at first for Abelard to meet her save in the
most casual way; yet every time that he heard her exquisite voice and
watched her graceful manners he became more and more infatuated. His
studies suddenly seemed tame and colorless beside the fierce scarlet
flame which blazed up in his heart.

Nevertheless, it was because of these studies and of his great
reputation as a scholar that he managed to obtain access to Heloise. He
flattered her uncle and made a chance proposal that he should himself
become an inmate of Fulbert's household in order that he might teach
this girl of so much promise. Such an offer coming from so brilliant a
man was joyfully accepted.

From that time Abelard could visit Heloise without restraint. He was
her teacher, and the two spent hours together, nominally in the study
of Greek and Hebrew; but doubtless very little was said between them
upon such unattractive subjects. On the contrary, with all his wide
experience of life, his eloquence, his perfect manners, and his
fascination, Abelard put forth his power to captivate the senses of a
girl still in her teens and quite ignorant of the world. As Remusat
says, he employed to win her the genius which had overwhelmed all the
great centers of learning in the Western world.

It was then that the pleasures of knowledge, the joys of thought, the
emotions of eloquence, were all called into play to charm and move and
plunge into a profound and strange intoxication this noble and tender
heart which had never known either love or sorrow. ... One can imagine
that everything helped on the inevitable end. Their studies gave them
opportunities to see each other freely, and also permitted them to be
alone together. Then their books lay open between them; but either long
periods of silence stilled their reading, or else words of deepening
intimacy made them forget their studies altogether. The eyes of the two
lovers turned from the book to mingle their glances, and then to turn
away in a confusion that was conscious.

Hand would touch hand, apparently by accident; and when conversation
ceased, Abelard would often hear the long, quivering sigh which showed
the strange, half-frightened, and yet exquisite joy which Heloise
experienced.

It was not long before the girl's heart had been wholly won.
Transported by her emotion, she met the caresses of her lover with
those as unrestrained as his. Her very innocence deprived her of the
protection which older women would have had. All was given freely, and
even wildly, by Heloise; and all was taken by Abelard, who afterward
himself declared:

"The pleasure of teaching her to love surpassed the delightful
fragrance of all the perfumes in the world."

Yet these two could not always live in a paradise which was entirely
their own. The world of Paris took notice of their close association.
Some poems written to Heloise by Abelard, as if in letters of fire,
were found and shown to Fulbert, who, until this time, had suspected
nothing. Angrily he ordered Abelard to leave his house. He forbade his
niece to see her lover any more.

But the two could not be separated; and, indeed, there was good reason
why they should still cling together. Secretly Heloise left her uncle's
house and fled through the narrow lanes of Paris to the dwelling of
Abelard's sister, Denyse, where Abelard himself was living. There,
presently, the young girl gave birth to a son, who was named Astrolabe,
after an instrument used by astronomers, since both the father and the
mother felt that the offspring of so great a love should have no
ordinary name.

Fulbert was furious, and rightly so. His hospitality had been outraged
and his niece dishonored. He insisted that the pair should at once be
married. Here was revealed a certain weakness in the character of
Abelard. He consented to the marriage, but insisted that it should be
kept an utter secret.

Oddly enough, it was Heloise herself who objected to becoming the wife
of the man she loved. Unselfishness could go no farther. She saw that,
were he to marry her, his advancement in the Church would be almost
impossible; for, while the very minor clergy sometimes married in spite
of the papal bulls, matrimony was becoming a fatal bar to
ecclesiastical promotion. And so Heloise pleaded pitifully, both with
her uncle and with Abelard, that there should be no marriage. She would
rather bear all manner of disgrace than stand in the way of Abelard's
advancement.

He has himself given some of the words in which she pleaded with him:

What glory shall I win from you, when I have made you quite inglorious
and have humbled both of us? What vengeance will the world inflict on
me if I deprive it of one so brilliant? What curses will follow such a
marriage? How outrageous would it be that you, whom nature created for
the universal good, should be devoted to one woman and plunged into
such disgrace? I loathe the thought of a marriage which would humiliate
you.

Indeed, every possible effort which another woman in her place would
employ to make him marry her she used in order to dissuade him.
Finally, her sweet face streaming with tears, she uttered that
tremendous sentence which makes one really think that she loved him as
no other woman ever loved a man. She cried out, in an agony of
self-sacrifice:

"I would rather be your mistress than the wife even of an emperor!"

Nevertheless, the two were married, and Abelard returned to his
lecture-room and to his studies. For months they met but seldom.
Meanwhile, however, the taunts and innuendos directed against Heloise
so irritated Fulbert that he broke his promise of secrecy, and told his
friends that Abelard and Heloise were man and wife. They went to
Heloise for confirmation. Once more she showed in an extraordinary way
the depth of her devotion.

"I am no wife," she said. "It is not true that Abelard has married me.
My uncle merely tells you this to save my reputation."

They asked her whether she would swear to this; and, without a moment's
hesitation, this pure and noble woman took an oath upon the Scriptures
that there had been no marriage.

Fulbert was enraged by this. He ill-treated Heloise, and, furthermore,
he forbade Abelard to visit her. The girl, therefore, again left her
uncle's house and betook herself to a convent just outside of Paris,
where she assumed the habit of a nun as a disguise. There Abelard
continued from time to time to meet her.

When Fulbert heard of this he put his own interpretation on it. He
believed that Abelard intended to ignore the marriage altogether, and
that possibly he might even marry some other woman. In any case, he now
hated Abelard with all his heart; and he resolved to take a fearful and
unnatural vengeance which would at once prevent his enemy from making
any other marriage, while at the same time it would debar him from
ecclesiastical preferment.

To carry out his plot Fulbert first bribed a man who was the
body-servant of Abelard, watching at the door of his room each night.
Then he hired the services of four ruffians. After Abelard had retired
and was deep in slumber the treacherous valet unbarred the door. The
hirelings of Fulbert entered and fell upon the sleeping man. Three of
them bound him fast, while the fourth, with a razor, inflicted on him
the most shameful mutilation that is possible. Then, extinguishing the
lights, the wretches slunk away and were lost in darkness, leaving
behind their victim bound to his couch, uttering cries of torment and
bathed in his own blood.

It is a shocking story, and yet it is intensely characteristic of the
lawless and barbarous era in which it happened. Early the next morning
the news flew rapidly through Paris. The city hummed like a bee-hive.
Citizens and students and ecclesiastics poured into the street and
surrounded the house of Abelard.

"Almost the entire city," says Fulques, as quoted by McCabe, "went
clamoring toward his house. Women wept as if each one had lost her
husband."

Unmanned though he was, Abelard still retained enough of the spirit of
his time to seek vengeance. He, in his turn, employed ruffians whom he
set upon the track of those who had assaulted him. The treacherous
valet and one of Fulbert's hirelings were run down, seized, and
mutilated precisely as Abelard had been; and their eyes were blinded. A
third was lodged in prison. Fulbert himself was accused before one of
the Church courts, which alone had power to punish an ecclesiastic, and
all his goods were confiscated.

But, meantime, how did it fare with Heloise? Her grief was greater than
his own, while her love and her devotion were absolutely undiminished.
But Abelard now showed a selfishness--and indeed, a meanness--far
beyond any that he had before exhibited. Heloise could no more be his
wife. He made it plain that he put no trust in her fidelity. He was
unwilling that she should live in the world while he could not; and so
he told her sternly that she must take the veil and bury herself for
ever in a nunnery.

The pain and shame which she experienced at this came wholly from the
fact that evidently Abelard did not trust her. Long afterward she wrote:

God knows I should not have hesitated, at your command, to precede or
to follow you to hell itself!

It was his distrust that cut her to the heart. Still, her love for him
was so intense that she obeyed his order. Soon after she took the vows;
and in the convent chapel, shaken with sobs, she knelt before the altar
and assumed the veil of a cloistered nun. Abelard himself put on the
black tunic of a Benedictine monk and entered the Abbey of St. Denis.

It is unnecessary here to follow out all the details of the lives of
Abelard and Heloise after this heart-rendering scene. Abelard passed
through many years of strife and disappointment, and even of
humiliation; for on one occasion, just as he had silenced Guillaume de
Champeaux, so he himself was silenced and put to rout by Bernard of
Clairvaux--"a frail, tense, absorbed, dominant little man, whose face
was white and worn with suffering," but in whose eyes there was a light
of supreme strength. Bernard represented pure faith, as Abelard
represented pure reason; and the two men met before a great council to
match their respective powers.

Bernard, with fiery eloquence, brought a charge of heresy against
Abelard in an oration which was like a charge of cavalry. When he had
concluded Abelard rose with an ashen face, stammered out a few words,
and sat down. He was condemned by the council, and his works were
ordered to be burned.

All his later life was one of misfortune, of humiliation, and even of
personal danger. The reckless monks whom he tried to rule rose fiercely
against him. His life was threatened. He betook himself to a desolate
and lonely place, where he built for himself a hut of reeds and rushes,
hoping to spend his final years in meditation. But there were many who
had not forgotten his ability as a teacher. These flocked by hundreds
to the desert place where he abode. His hut was surrounded by tents and
rude hovels, built by his scholars for their shelter.

Thus Abelard resumed his teaching, though in a very different frame of
mind. In time he built a structure of wood and stone, which he called
the Paraclete, some remains of which can still be seen.

All this time no word had passed between him and Heloise. But presently
Abelard wrote and gave to the world a curious and exceedingly frank
book, which he called The Story of My Misfortunes. A copy of it reached
the hands of Heloise, and she at once sent to Abelard the first of a
series of letters which have remained unique in the literature of love.

Ten years had passed, and yet the woman's heart was as faithful and as
full of yearning as on the day when the two had parted. It has been
said that the letters are not genuine, and they must be read with this
assertion in mind; yet it is difficult to believe that any one save
Heloise herself could have flung a human soul into such frankly
passionate utterances, or that any imitator could have done the work.

In her first letter, which was sent to Abelard written upon parchment,
she said:

At thy command I would change, not merely my costume, but my very soul,
so entirely art thou the sole possessor of my body and my spirit.
Never, God is my witness, never have I sought anything in thee but
thyself; I have sought thee, and not thy gifts. I have not looked to
the marriage-bond or dowry.

She begged him to write to her, and to lead her to God, as once he had
led her into the mysteries of pleasure. Abelard answered in a letter,
friendly to be sure, but formal--the letter of a priest to a cloistered
nun. The opening words of it are characteristic of the whole:

To Heloise, his sister in Christ, from Abelard, her brother in Him.

The letter was a long one, but throughout the whole of it the writer's
tone was cold and prudent. Its very coldness roused her soul to a
passionate revolt. Her second letter bursts forth in a sort of anguish:

How hast thou been able to frame such thoughts, dearest? How hast thou
found words to convey them? Oh, if I dared but call God cruel to me!
Oh, most wretched of all creatures that I am! So sweet did I find the
pleasures of our loving days that I cannot bring myself to reject them
or to banish them from my memory. Wheresoever I go, they thrust
themselves upon my vision, and rekindle the old desire.

But Abelard knew only too well that not in this life could there be
anything save spiritual love between himself and Heloise. He wrote to
her again and again, always in the same remote and unimpassioned way.
He tells her about the history of monasticism, and discusses with her
matters of theology and ethics; but he never writes one word to feed
the flame that is consuming her. The woman understood at last; and by
degrees her letters became as calm as his--suffused, however, with a
tenderness and feeling which showed that in her heart of hearts she was
still entirely given to him.

After some years Abelard left his dwelling at the Paraclete, and there
was founded there a religious house of which Heloise became the abbess.
All the world respected her for her sweetness, her wisdom, and the
purity of her character. She made friends as easily as Abelard made
enemies. Even Bernard, who had overthrown her husband, sought out
Heloise to ask for her advice and counsel.

Abelard died while on his way to Rome, whither he was journeying in
order to undergo a penalty; and his body was brought back to the
Paraclete, where it was entombed. Over it for twenty-two years Heloise
watched with tender care; and when she died, her body was laid beside
that of her lover.

To-day their bones are mingled as she would have desired them to be
mingled. The stones of their tomb in the great cemetery of Pere
Lachaise were brought from the ruins of the Paraclete, and above the
sarcophagus are two recumbent figures, the whole being the work of the
artist Alexandra Lenoir, who died in 1836. The figure representing
Heloise is not, however, an authentic likeness. The model for it was a
lady belonging to a noble family of France, and the figure itself was
brought to Pere Lachaise from the ancient College de Beauvais.

The letters of Heloise have been read and imitated throughout the whole
of the last nine centuries. Some have found in them the utterances of a
woman whose love of love was greater than her love of God and whose
intensity of passion nothing could subdue; and so these have condemned
her. But others, like Chateaubriand, have more truly seen in them a
pure and noble spirit to whom fate had been very cruel; and who was,
after all, writing to the man who had been her lawful husband.

Some of the most famous imitations of her letters are those in the
ancient poem entitled, "The Romance of the Rose," written by Jean de
Meung, in the thirteenth century; and in modern times her first letter
was paraphrased by Alexander Pope, and in French by Colardeau. There
exist in English half a dozen translations of them, with Abelard's
replies. It is interesting to remember that practically all the other
writings of Abelard remained unpublished and unedited until a very
recent period. He was a remarkable figure as a philosopher and scholar;
but the world cares for him only because he was loved by Heloise.




QUEEN ELIZABETH AND THE EARL OF LEICESTER


History has many romantic stories to tell of the part which women have
played in determining the destinies of nations. Sometimes it is a
woman's beauty that causes the shifting of a province. Again it is
another woman's rich possessions that incite invasion and lead to
bloody wars. Marriages or dowries, or the refusal of marriages and the
lack of dowries, inheritance through an heiress, the failure of a male
succession--in these and in many other ways women have set their mark
indelibly upon the trend of history.

However, if we look over these different events we shall find that it
is not so much the mere longing for a woman--the desire to have her as
a queen--that has seriously affected the annals of any nation. Kings,
like ordinary men, have paid their suit and then have ridden away
repulsed, yet not seriously dejected. Most royal marriages are made
either to secure the succession to a throne by a legitimate line of
heirs or else to unite adjoining states and make a powerful kingdom out
of two that are less powerful. But, as a rule, kings have found greater
delight in some sheltered bower remote from courts than in the castled
halls and well-cared-for nooks where their own wives and children have
been reared with all the appurtenances of legitimacy.

There are not many stories that hang persistently about the love-making
of a single woman. In the case of one or another we may find an episode
or two--something dashing, something spirited or striking, something
brilliant and exhilarating, or something sad. But for a woman's whole
life to be spent in courtship that meant nothing and that was only a
clever aid to diplomacy--this is surely an unusual and really wonderful
thing.

It is the more unusual because the woman herself was not intended by
nature to be wasted upon the cold and cheerless sport of chancellors
and counselors and men who had no thought of her except to use her as a
pawn. She was hot-blooded, descended from a fiery race, and one whose
temper was quick to leap into the passion of a man.

In studying this phase of the long and interesting life of Elizabeth of
England we must notice several important facts. In the first place, she
gave herself, above all else, to the maintenance of England--not an
England that would be half Spanish or half French, or even partly Dutch
and Flemish, but the Merry England of tradition--the England that was
one and undivided, with its growing freedom of thought, its bows and
bills, its nut-brown ale, its sturdy yeomen, and its loyalty to crown
and Parliament. She once said, almost as in an agony:

"I love England more than anything!"

And one may really hold that this was true.

For England she schemed and planned. For England she gave up many of
her royal rights. For England she descended into depths of treachery.
For England she left herself on record as an arrant liar, false,
perjured, yet successful; and because of her success for England's sake
her countrymen will hold her in high remembrance, since her scheming
and her falsehood are the offenses that one pardons most readily in a
woman.

In the second place, it must be remembered that Elizabeth's courtships
and pretended love-makings were almost always a part of her diplomacy.
When not a part of her diplomacy they were a mere appendage to her
vanity. To seem to be the flower of the English people, and to be
surrounded by the noblest, the bravest, and the most handsome
cavaliers, not only of her own kingdom, but of others--this was,
indeed, a choice morsel of which she was fond of tasting, even though
it meant nothing beyond the moment.

Finally, though at times she could be very cold, and though she made
herself still colder in order that she might play fast and loose with
foreign suitors who played fast and loose with her--the King of Spain,
the Duc d'Alencon, brother of the French king, with an Austrian
archduke, with a magnificent barbarian prince of Muscovy, with Eric of
Sweden, or any other Scandinavian suitor--she felt a woman's need for
some nearer and more tender association to which she might give freer
play and in which she might feel those deeper emotions without the
danger that arises when love is mingled with diplomacy.

Let us first consider a picture of the woman as she really was in order
that we may understand her triple nature--consummate mistress of every
art that statesmen know, and using at every moment her person as a
lure; a vain-glorious queen who seemed to be the prey of boundless
vanity; and, lastly, a woman who had all a woman's passion, and who
could cast suddenly aside the check and balance which restrained her
before the public gaze and could allow herself to give full play to the
emotion that she inherited from the king, her father, who was himself a
marvel of fire and impetuosity. That the daughter of Henry VIII. and
Anne Boleyn should be a gentle, timid maiden would be to make heredity
a farce.

Elizabeth was about twenty-five years of age when she ascended the
throne of England. It is odd that the date of her birth cannot be given
with precision. The intrigues and disturbances of the English court,
and the fact that she was a princess, made her birth a matter of less
account than if there had been no male heir to the throne. At any rate,
when she ascended it, after the deaths of her brother, King Edward VI.,
and her sister, Queen Mary, she was a woman well trained both in
intellect and in physical development.

Mr. Martin Hume, who loves to dwell upon the later years of Queen
Elizabeth, speaks rather bitterly of her as a "painted old harridan";
and such she may well have seemed when, at nearly seventy years of age,
she leered and grinned a sort of skeleton smile at the handsome young
courtiers who pretended to see in her the queen of beauty and to be
dying for love of her.

Yet, in her earlier years, when she was young and strong and impetuous,
she deserved far different words than these. The portrait of her by
Zucchero, which now hangs in Hampton Court, depicts her when she must
have been of more than middle age; and still the face is one of beauty,
though it be a strange and almost artificial beauty--one that draws,
attracts, and, perhaps, lures you on against your will.

It is interesting to compare this painting with the frank word-picture
of a certain German agent who was sent to England by his emperor, and
who seems to have been greatly fascinated by Queen Elizabeth. She was
at that time in the prime of her beauty and her power. Her complexion
was of that peculiar transparency which is seen only in the face of
golden blondes. Her figure was fine and graceful, and her wit an
accomplishment that would have made a woman of any rank or time
remarkable. The German envoy says:

She lives a life of such magnificence and feasting as can hardly be
imagined, and occupies a great portion of her time with balls,
banquets, hunting, and similar amusements, with the utmost possible
display, but nevertheless she insists upon far greater respect being
shown her than was exacted by Queen Mary. She summons Parliament, but
lets them know that her orders must be obeyed in any case.

If any one will look at the painting by Zucchero he will see how much
is made of Elizabeth's hands--a distinctive feature quite as noble with
the Tudors as is the "Hapsburg lip" among the descendants of the house
of Austria. These were ungloved, and were very long and white, and she
looked at them and played with them a great deal; and, indeed, they
justified the admiration with which they were regarded by her
flatterers.

Such was the personal appearance of Elizabeth. When a young girl, we
have still more favorable opinions of her that were written by those
who had occasion to be near her. Not only do they record swift glimpses
of her person, but sometimes in a word or two they give an insight into
certain traits of mind which came out prominently in her later years.

It may, perhaps, be well to view her as a woman before we regard her
more fully as a queen. It has been said that Elizabeth inherited many
of the traits of her father--the boldness of spirit, the rapidity of
decision, and, at the same time, the fox-like craft which often showed
itself when it was least expected.

Henry had also, as is well known, a love of the other sex, which has
made his reign memorable. And yet it must be noted that while he loved
much, it was not loose love. Many a king of England, from Henry II. to
Charles II., has offended far more than Henry VIII. Where Henry loved,
he married; and it was the unfortunate result of these royal marriages
that has made him seem unduly fond of women. If, however, we examine
each one of the separate espousals we shall find that he did not enter
into it lightly, and that he broke it off unwillingly. His ardent
temperament, therefore, was checked by a certain rational or
conventional propriety, so that he was by no means a loose liver, as
many would make him out to be.

We must remember this when we recall the charges that have been made
against Elizabeth, and the strange stories that were told of her
tricks--by no means seemly tricks--which she used to play with her
guardian, Lord Thomas Seymour. The antics she performed with him in her
dressing-room were made the subject of an official inquiry; yet it came
out that while Elizabeth was less than sixteen, and Lord Thomas was
very much her senior, his wife was with him on his visits to the
chamber of the princess.

Sir Robert Tyrwhitt and his wife were also sent to question her,
Tyrwhitt had a keen mind and one well trained to cope with any other's
wit in this sort of cross-examination. Elizabeth was only a girl of
fifteen, yet she was a match for the accomplished courtier in diplomacy
and quick retort. He was sent down to worm out of her everything that
she knew. Threats and flattery and forged letters and false confessions
were tried on her; but they were tried in vain. She would tell nothing
of importance. She denied everything. She sulked, she cried, she
availed herself of a woman's favorite defense in suddenly attacking
those who had attacked her. She brought counter charges against
Tyrwhitt, and put her enemies on their own defense. Not a compromising
word could they wring out of her.

She bitterly complained of the imprisonment of her governess, Mrs.
Ashley, and cried out:

"I have not so behaved that you need put more mistresses upon me!"

Altogether, she was too much for Sir Robert, and he was wise enough to
recognize her cleverness.

"She hath a very good wit," said he, shrewdly; "and nothing is to be
gotten of her except by great policy." And he added: "If I had to say
my fancy, I think it more meet that she should have two governesses
than one."

Mr. Hume notes the fact that after the two servants of the princess had
been examined and had told nothing very serious they found that they
had been wise in remaining friends of the royal girl. No sooner had
Elizabeth become queen than she knighted the man Parry and made him
treasurer of the household, while Mrs. Ashley, the governess, was
treated with great consideration. Thus, very naturally, Mr. Hume says:
"They had probably kept back far more than they told."

Even Tyrwhitt believed that there was a secret compact between them,
for he said, quaintly: "They all sing one song, and she hath set the
note for them."

Soon after this her brother Edward's death brought to the throne her
elder sister, Mary, who has harshly become known as Bloody Mary. During
this time Elizabeth put aside her boldness, and became apparently a shy
and simple-minded virgin. Surrounded on every side by those who sought
to trap her, there was nothing in her bearing to make her seem the head
of a party or the young chief of a faction. Nothing could exceed her in
meekness. She spoke of her sister in the humblest terms. She exhibited
no signs of the Tudor animation that was in reality so strong a part of
her character.

But, coming to the throne, she threw away her modesty and brawled and
rioted with very little self-restraint. The people as a whole found
little fault with her. She reminded them of her father, the bluff King
Hal; and even those who criticized her did so only partially. They
thought much better of her than they had of her saturnine sister, the
first Queen Mary.

The life of Elizabeth has been very oddly misunderstood, not so much
for the facts in it as for the manner in which these have been arranged
and the relation which they have to one another. We ought to recollect
that this woman did not live in a restricted sphere, that her life was
not a short one, and that it was crowded with incidents and full of
vivid color. Some think of her as living for a short period of time and
speak of the great historical characters who surrounded her as
belonging to a single epoch. To them she has one set of suitors all the
time--the Duc d'Alencon, the King of Denmark's brother, the Prince of
Sweden, the russian potentate, the archduke sending her sweet messages
from Austria, the melancholy King of Spain, together with a number of
her own brilliant Englishmen--Sir William Pickering, Sir Robert Dudley,
Lord Darnley, the Earl of Essex, Sir Philip Sidney, and Sir Walter
Raleigh.

Of course, as a matter of fact, Elizabeth lived for nearly seventy
years--almost three-quarters of a century--and in that long time there
came and went both men and women, those whom she had used and cast
aside, with others whom she had also treated with gratitude, and who
had died gladly serving her. But through it all there was a continual
change in her environment, though not in her. The young soldier went to
the battle-field and died; the wise counselor gave her his advice, and
she either took it or cared nothing for it. She herself was a curious
blending of forwardness and folly, of wisdom and wantonness, of
frivolity and unbridled fancy. But through it all she loved her people,
even though she often cheated them and made them pay her taxes in the
harsh old way that prevailed before there was any right save the king's
will.

At the same time, this was only by fits and starts, and on the whole
she served them well. Therefore, to most of them she was always the
good Queen Bess. What mattered it to the ditcher and yeoman, far from
the court, that the queen was said to dance in her nightdress and to
swear like a trooper?

It was, indeed, largely from these rustic sources that such stories
were scattered throughout England. Peasants thought them picturesque.
More to the point with them were peace and prosperity throughout the
country, the fact that law was administered with honesty and justice,
and that England was safe from her deadly enemies--the swarthy
Spaniards and the scheming French.

But, as I said, we must remember always that the Elizabeth of one
period was not the Elizabeth of another, and that the England of one
period was not the England of another. As one thinks of it, there is
something wonderful in the almost star-like way in which this girl
flitted unharmed through a thousand perils. Her own countrymen were at
first divided against her; a score of greedy, avaricious suitors sought
her destruction, or at least her hand to lead her to destruction; all
the great powers of the Continent were either demanding an alliance
with England or threatening to dash England down amid their own
dissensions.

What had this girl to play off against such dangers? Only an undaunted
spirit, a scheming mind that knew no scruples, and finally her own
person and the fact that she was a woman, and, therefore, might give
herself in marriage and become the mother of a race of kings.

It was this last weapon, the weapon of her sex, that proved, perhaps,
the most powerful of all. By promising a marriage or by denying it, or
by neither promising nor denying but withholding it, she gave forth a
thousand wily intimations which kept those who surrounded her at bay
until she had made still another deft and skilful combination, escaping
like some startled creature to a new place of safety.

In 1583, when she was fifty years of age, she had reached a point when
her courtships and her pretended love-making were no longer necessary.
She had played Sweden against Denmark, and France against Spain, and
the Austrian archduke against the others, and many suitors in her own
land against the different factions which they headed. She might have
sat herself down to rest; for she could feel that her wisdom had led
her up into a high place, whence she might look down in peace and with
assurance of the tranquillity that she had won. Not yet had the great
Armada rolled and thundered toward the English shores. But she was
certain that her land was secure, compact, and safe.

It remains to see what were those amatory relations which she may be
said to have sincerely held. She had played at love-making with foreign
princes, because it was wise and, for the moment, best. She had played
with Englishmen of rank who aspired to her hand, because in that way
she might conciliate, at one time her Catholic and at another her
Protestant subjects. But what of the real and inward feeling of her
heart, when she was not thinking of political problems or the
necessities of state!

This is an interesting question. One may at least seek the answer,
hoping thereby to solve one of the most interesting phases of this
perplexing and most remarkable woman.

It must be remembered that it was not a question of whether Elizabeth
desired marriage. She may have done so as involving a brilliant stroke
of policy. In this sense she may have wished to marry one of the two
French princes who were among her suitors. But even here she hesitated,
and her Parliament disapproved; for by this time England had become
largely Protestant. Again, had she married a French prince and had
children, England might have become an appanage of France.

There is no particular evidence that she had any feeling at all for her
Flemish, Austrian, or Russian suitors, while the Swede's pretensions
were the laughing-stock of the English court. So we may set aside this
question of marriage as having nothing to do with her emotional life.
She did desire a son, as was shown by her passionate outcry when she
compared herself with Mary of Scotland.

"The Queen of Scots has a bonny son, while I am but a barren stock!"

She was too wise to wed a subject; though, had she married at all, her
choice would doubtless have been an Englishman. In this respect, as in
so many others, she was like her father, who chose his numerous wives,
with the exception of the first, from among the English ladies of the
court; just as the showy Edward IV. was happy in marrying "Dame
Elizabeth Woodville." But what a king may do is by no means so easy for
a queen; and a husband is almost certain to assume an authority which
makes him unpopular with the subjects of his wife.

Hence, as said above, we must consider not so much whom she would have
liked to marry, but rather to whom her love went out spontaneously, and
not as a part of that amatory play which amused her from the time when
she frisked with Seymour down to the very last days, when she could no
longer move about, but when she still dabbled her cheeks with rouge and
powder and set her skeleton face amid a forest of ruffs.

There were many whom she cared for after a fashion. She would not let
Sir Walter Raleigh visit her American colonies, because she could not
bear to have him so long away from her. She had great moments of
passion for the Earl of Essex, though in the end she signed his
death-warrant because he was as dominant in spirit as the queen herself.

Readers of Sir Walter Scott's wonderfully picturesque novel,
Kenilworth, will note how he throws the strongest light upon
Elizabeth's affection for Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester. Scott's
historical instinct is united here with a vein of psychology which goes
deeper than is usual with him. We see Elizabeth trying hard to share
her favor equally between two nobles; but the Earl of Essex fails to
please her because he lacked those exquisite manners which made
Leicester so great a favorite with the fastidious queen.

Then, too, the story of Leicester's marriage with Amy Robsart is
something more than a myth, based upon an obscure legend and an ancient
ballad. The earl had had such a wife, and there were sinister stories
about the manner of her death. But it is Scott who invents the
villainous Varney and the bulldog Anthony Foster; just as he brought
the whole episode into the foreground and made it occur at a period
much later than was historically true. Still, Scott felt--and he was
imbued with the spirit and knowledge of that time--a strong conviction
that Elizabeth loved Leicester as she really loved no one else.

There is one interesting fact which goes far to convince us. Just as
her father was, in a way, polygamous, so Elizabeth was even more truly
polyandrous. It was inevitable that she should surround herself with
attractive men, whose love-locks she would caress and whose flatteries
she would greedily accept. To the outward eye there was very little
difference in her treatment of the handsome and daring nobles of her
court; yet a historian of her time makes one very shrewd remark when he
says: "To every one she gave some power at times--to all save
Leicester."

Cecil and Walsingham in counsel and Essex and Raleigh in the field
might have their own way at times, and even share the sovereign's
power, but to Leicester she intrusted no high commands and no important
mission. Why so? Simply because she loved him more than any of the
rest; and, knowing this, she knew that if besides her love she granted
him any measure of control or power, then she would be but half a queen
and would be led either to marry him or else to let him sway her as he
would.

For the reason given, one may say with confidence that, while
Elizabeth's light loves were fleeting, she gave a deep affection to
this handsome, bold, and brilliant Englishman and cherished him in a
far different way from any of the others. This was as near as she ever
came to marriage, and it was this love at least which makes
Shakespeare's famous line as false as it is beautiful, when he
describes "the imperial votaress" as passing by "in maiden meditation,
fancy free."




MARY QUEEN OF SCOTS AND LORD BOTHWELL


Mary Stuart and Cleopatra are the two women who have most attracted the
fancy of poets, dramatists, novelists, and painters, from their own
time down to the present day.

In some respects there is a certain likeness in their careers. Each was
queen of a nation whose affairs were entangled with those of a much
greater one. Each sought for her own ideal of love until she found it.
Each won that love recklessly, almost madly. Each, in its attainment,
fell from power and fortune. Each died before her natural life was
ended. One caused the man she loved to cast away the sovereignty of a
mighty state. The other lost her own crown in order that she might
achieve the whole desire of her heart.

There is still another parallel which may be found. Each of these women
was reputed to be exquisitely beautiful; yet each fell short of
beauty's highest standards. They are alike remembered in song and story
because of qualities that are far more powerful than any physical charm
can be. They impressed the imagination of their own contemporaries just
as they had impressed the imagination of all succeeding ages, by reason
of a strange and irresistible fascination which no one could explain,
but which very few could experience and resist.

Mary Stuart was born six days before her father's death, and when the
kingdom which was her heritage seemed to be almost in its death-throes.
James V. of Scotland, half Stuart and half Tudor, was no ordinary
monarch. As a mere boy he had burst the bonds with which a regency had
bound him, and he had ruled the wild Scotland of the sixteenth century.
He was brave and crafty, keen in statesmanship, and dissolute in
pleasure.

His first wife had given him no heirs; so at her death he sought out a
princess whom he pursued all the more ardently because she was also
courted by the burly Henry VIII. of England. This girl was Marie of
Lorraine, daughter of the Duc de Guise. She was fit to be the mother of
a lion's brood, for she was above six feet in height and of proportions
so ample as to excite the admiration of the royal voluptuary who sat
upon the throne of England.

"I am big," said he, "and I want a wife who is as big as I am."

But James of Scotland wooed in person, and not by embassies, and he
triumphantly carried off his strapping princess. Henry of England
gnawed his beard in vain; and, though in time he found consolation in
another woman's arms, he viewed James not only as a public but as a
private enemy.

There was war between the two countries. First the Scots repelled an
English army; but soon they were themselves disgracefully defeated at
Solway Moss by a force much their inferior in numbers. The shame of it
broke King James's heart. As he was galloping from the battle-field the
news was brought him that his wife had given birth to a daughter. He
took little notice of the message; and in a few days he had died,
moaning with his last breath the mysterious words:

"It came with a lass--with a lass it will go!"

The child who was born at this ill-omened crisis was Mary Stuart, who
within a week became, in her own right, Queen of Scotland. Her mother
acted as regent of the kingdom. Henry of England demanded that the
infant girl should be betrothed to his young son, Prince Edward, who
afterward reigned as Edward VI., though he died while still a boy. The
proposal was rejected, and the war between England and Scotland went on
its bloody course; but meanwhile the little queen was sent to France,
her mother's home, so that she might be trained in accomplishments
which were rare in Scotland.

In France she grew up at the court of Catherine de' Medici, that
imperious intriguer whose splendid surroundings were tainted with the
corruption which she had brought from her native Italy. It was, indeed,
a singular training-school for a girl of Mary Stuart's character. She
saw about her a superficial chivalry and a most profound depravity.
Poets like Ronsard graced the life of the court with exquisite verse.
Troubadours and minstrels sang sweet music there. There were fetes and
tournaments and gallantry of bearing; yet, on the other hand, there was
every possible refinement and variety of vice. Men were slain before
the eyes of the queen herself. The talk of the court was of intrigue
and lust and evil things which often verged on crime. Catherine de'
Medici herself kept her nominal husband at arm's-length; and in order
to maintain her grasp on France she connived at the corruption of her
own children, three of whom were destined in their turn to sit upon the
throne.

Mary Stuart grew up in these surroundings until she was sixteen, eating
the fruit which gave a knowledge of both good and evil. Her
intelligence was very great. She quickly learned Italian, French, and
Latin. She was a daring horsewoman. She was a poet and an artist even
in her teens. She was also a keen judge of human motives, for those
early years of hers had forced her into a womanhood that was premature
but wonderful. It had been proposed that she should marry the eldest
son of Catherine, so that in time the kingdom of Scotland and that of
France might be united, while if Elizabeth of England were to die
unmarried her realm also would fall to this pair of children.

And so Mary, at sixteen, wedded the Dauphin Francis, who was a year her
junior. The prince was a wretched, whimpering little creature, with a
cankered body and a blighted soul. Marriage with such a husband seemed
absurd. It never was a marriage in reality. The sickly child would cry
all night, for he suffered from abscesses in his ears, and his manhood
had been prematurely taken from him. Nevertheless, within a twelvemonth
the French king died and Mary Stuart was Queen of France as well as of
Scotland, hampered only by her nominal obedience to the sick boy whom
she openly despised. At seventeen she showed herself a master spirit.
She held her own against the ambitious Catherine de' Medici, whom she
contemptuously nicknamed "the apothecary's daughter." For the brief
period of a year she was actually the ruler of France; but then her
husband died and she was left a widow, restless, ambitious, and yet no
longer having any of the power she loved.

Mary Stuart at this time had become a woman whose fascination was
exerted over all who knew her. She was very tall and very slim, with
chestnut hair, "like a flower of the heat, both lax and delicate." Her
skin was fair and pale, so clear and so transparent as to make the
story plausible that when she drank from a flask of wine, the red
liquid could be seen passing down her slender throat.

Yet with all this she was not fine in texture, but hardy as a man. She
could endure immense fatigue without yielding to it. Her supple form
had the strength of steel. There was a gleam in her hazel eyes that
showed her to be brimful of an almost fierce vitality. Young as she
was, she was the mistress of a thousand arts, and she exhaled a sort of
atmosphere that turned the heads of men. The Stuart blood made her
impatient of control, careless of state, and easy-mannered. The French
and the Tudor strain gave her vivacity. She could be submissive in
appearance while still persisting in her aims. She could be languorous
and seductive while cold within. Again, she could assume the
haughtiness which belonged to one who was twice a queen.

Two motives swayed her, and they fought together for supremacy. One was
the love of power, and the other was the love of love. The first was
natural to a girl who was a sovereign in her own right. The second was
inherited, and was then forced into a rank luxuriance by the sort of
life that she had seen about her. At eighteen she was a strangely
amorous creature, given to fondling and kissing every one about her,
with slight discrimination. From her sense of touch she received
emotions that were almost necessary to her existence. With her slender,
graceful hands she was always stroking the face of some favorite--it
might be only the face of a child, or it might be the face of some
courtier or poet, or one of the four Marys whose names are linked with
hers--Mary Livingstone, Mary Fleming, Mary Beaton, and Mary Seton, the
last of whom remained with her royal mistress until her death.

But one must not be too censorious in thinking of Mary Stuart. She was
surrounded everywhere by enemies. During her stay in France she was
hated by the faction of Catherine de' Medici. When she returned to
Scotland she was hated because of her religion by the Protestant lords.
Her every action was set forth in the worst possible light. The most
sinister meaning was given to everything she said or did. In truth, we
must reject almost all the stories which accuse her of anything more
than a certain levity of conduct.

She was not a woman to yield herself in love's last surrender unless
her intellect and heart alike had been made captive. She would listen
to the passionate outpourings of poets and courtiers, and she would
plunge her eyes into theirs, and let her hair just touch their faces,
and give them her white hands to kiss--but that was all. Even in this
she was only following the fashion of the court where she was bred, and
she was not unlike her royal relative, Elizabeth of England, who had
the same external amorousness coupled with the same internal
self-control.

Mary Stuart's love life makes a piteous story, for it is the life of
one who was ever seeking--seeking for the man to whom she could look
up, who could be strong and brave and ardent like herself, and at the
same time be more powerful and more steadfast even than she herself in
mind and thought. Whatever may be said of her, and howsoever the facts
may be colored by partisans, this royal girl, stung though she was by
passion and goaded by desire, cared nothing for any man who could not
match her in body and mind and spirit all at once.

It was in her early widowhood that she first met the man, and when
their union came it brought ruin on them both. In France there came to
her one day one of her own subjects, the Earl of Bothwell. He was but a
few years older than she, and in his presence for the first time she
felt, in her own despite, that profoundly moving, indescribable, and
never-to-be-forgotten thrill which shakes a woman to the very center of
her being, since it is the recognition of a complete affinity.

Lord Bothwell, like Queen Mary, has been terribly maligned. Unlike her,
he has found only a few defenders. Maurice Hewlett has drawn a picture
of him more favorable than many, and yet it is a picture that repels.
Bothwell, says he, was of a type esteemed by those who pronounce vice
to be their virtue. He was "a galliard, flushed with rich blood,
broad-shouldered, square-jawed, with a laugh so happy and so prompt
that the world, rejoicing to hear it, thought all must be well wherever
he might be. He wore brave clothes, sat a brave horse, and kept brave
company bravely. His high color, while it betokened high feeding, got
him the credit of good health. His little eyes twinkled so merrily that
you did not see they were like a pig's, sly and greedy at once, and
bloodshot. His tawny beard concealed a jaw underhung, a chin jutting
and dangerous. His mouth had a cruel twist; but his laughing hid that
too. The bridge of his nose had been broken; few observed it, or
guessed at the brawl which must have given it to him. Frankness was his
great charm, careless ease in high places."

And so, when Mary Stuart first met him in her eighteenth year, Lord
Bothwell made her think as she had never thought of any other man, and
as she was not to think of any other man again. She grew to look
eagerly for the frank mockery "in those twinkling eyes, in that quick
mouth"; and to wonder whether it was with him always--asleep, at
prayers, fighting, furious, or in love.

Something more, however, must be said of Bothwell. He was undoubtedly a
roisterer, but he was very much a man. He made easy love to women. His
sword leaped quickly from its sheath. He could fight, and he could also
think. He was no brawling ruffian, no ordinary rake. Remembering what
Scotland was in those days, Bothwell might well seem in reality a
princely figure. He knew Italian; he was at home in French; he could
write fluent Latin. He was a collector of books and a reader of them
also. He was perhaps the only Scottish noble of his time who had a
book-plate of his own. Here is something more than a mere reveler. Here
is a man of varied accomplishments and of a complex character.

Though he stayed but a short time near the queen in France, he kindled
her imagination, so that when she seriously thought of men she thought
of Bothwell. And yet all the time she was fondling the young pages in
her retinue and kissing her maids of honor with her scarlet lips, and
lying on their knees, while poets like Ronsard and Chastelard wrote
ardent love sonnets to her and sighed and pined for something more than
the privilege of kissing her two dainty hands.

In 1561, less than a year after her widowhood, Mary set sail for
Scotland, never to return. The great high-decked ships which escorted
her sailed into the harbor of Leith, and she pressed on to Edinburgh. A
depressing change indeed from the sunny terraces and fields of France!
In her own realm were fog and rain and only a hut to shelter her upon
her landing. When she reached her capital there were few welcoming
cheers; but as she rode over the cobblestones to Holyrood, the squalid
wynds vomited forth great mobs of hard-featured, grim-visaged men and
women who stared with curiosity and a half-contempt at the girl queen
and her retinue of foreigners.

The Scots were Protestants of the most dour sort, and they distrusted
their new ruler because of her religion and because she loved to
surround herself with dainty things and bright colors and exotic
elegance. They feared lest she should try to repeal the law of
Scotland's Parliament which had made the country Protestant.

The very indifference of her subjects stirred up the nobler part of
Mary's nature. For a time she was indeed a queen. She governed wisely.
She respected the religious rights of her Protestant subjects. She
strove to bring order out of the chaos into which her country had
fallen. And she met with some success. The time came when her people
cheered her as she rode among them. Her subtle fascination was her
greatest source of strength. Even John Knox, that iron-visaged,
stentorian preacher, fell for a time under the charm of her presence.
She met him frankly and pleaded with him as a woman, instead of
commanding him as a queen. The surly ranter became softened for a time,
and, though he spoke of her to others as "Honeypot," he ruled his
tongue in public. She had offers of marriage from Austrian and Spanish
princes. The new King of France, her brother-in-law, would perhaps have
wedded her. It mattered little to Mary that Elizabeth of England was
hostile. She felt that she was strong enough to hold her own and govern
Scotland.

But who could govern a country such as Scotland was? It was a land of
broils and feuds, of clan enmities and fierce vendettas. Its nobles
were half barbarous, and they fought and slashed at one another with
drawn dirks almost in the presence of the queen herself. No matter whom
she favored, there rose up a swarm of enemies. Here was a Corsica of
the north, more savage and untamed than even the other Corsica.

In her perplexity Mary felt a woman's need of some man on whom she
would have the right to lean, and whom she could make king consort. She
thought that she had found him in the person of her cousin, Lord
Darnley, a Catholic, and by his upbringing half an Englishman. Darnley
came to Scotland, and for the moment Mary fancied that she had
forgotten Bothwell. Here again she was in love with love, and she
idealized the man who came to give it to her. Darnley seemed, indeed,
well worthy to be loved, for he was tall and handsome, appearing well
on horseback and having some of the accomplishments which Mary valued.

It was a hasty wooing, and the queen herself was first of all the
wooer. Her quick imagination saw in Darnley traits and gifts of which
he really had no share. Therefore, the marriage was soon concluded, and
Scotland had two sovereigns, King Henry and Queen Mary. So sure was
Mary of her indifference to Bothwell that she urged the earl to marry,
and he did marry a girl of the great house of Gordon.

Mary's self-suggested love for Darnley was extinguished almost on her
wedding-night. The man was a drunkard who came into her presence
befuddled and almost bestial. He had no brains. His vanity was
enormous. He loved no one but himself, and least of all this queen,
whom he regarded as having thrown herself at his empty head.

The first-fruits of the marriage were uprisings among the Protestant
lords. Mary then showed herself a heroic queen. At the head of a motley
band of soldiery who came at her call--half-clad, uncouth, and
savage--she rode into the west, sleeping at night upon the bare ground,
sharing the camp food, dressed in plain tartan, but swift and fierce as
any eagle. Her spirit ran like fire through the veins of those who
followed her. She crushed the insurrection, scattered its leaders, and
returned in triumph to her capital.

Now she was really queen, but here came in the other motive which was
interwoven in her character. She had shown herself a man in courage.
Should she not have the pleasures of a woman? To her court in Holyrood
came Bothwell once again, and this time Mary knew that he was all the
world to her. Darnley had shrunk from the hardships of battle. He was
steeped in low intrigues. He roused the constant irritation of the
queen by his folly and utter lack of sense and decency. Mary felt she
owed him nothing, but she forgot that she owed much to herself.

Her old amorous ways came back to her, and she relapsed into the joys
of sense. The scandal-mongers of the capital saw a lover in every man
with whom she talked. She did, in fact, set convention at defiance. She
dressed in men's clothing. She showed what the unemotional Scots
thought to be unseemly levity. The French poet, Chastelard, misled by
her external signs of favor, believed himself to be her choice. At the
end of one mad revel he was found secreted beneath her bed, and was
driven out by force. A second time he ventured to secrete himself
within the covers of the bed. Then he was dragged forth, imprisoned,
and condemned to death. He met his fate without a murmur, save at the
last when he stood upon the scaffold and, gazing toward the palace,
cried in French:

"Oh, cruel queen! I die for you!"

Another favorite, the Italian, David Rizzio, or Riccio, in like manner
wrote love verses to the queen, and she replied to them in kind; but
there is no evidence that she valued him save for his ability, which
was very great. She made him her foreign secretary, and the man whom he
supplanted worked on the jealousy of Darnley; so that one night, while
Mary and Rizzio were at dinner in a small private chamber, Darnley and
the others broke in upon her. Darnley held her by the waist while
Rizzio was stabbed before her eyes with a cruelty the greater because
the queen was soon to become a mother.

From that moment she hated Darnley as one would hate a snake. She
tolerated him only that he might acknowledge her child as his son. This
child was the future James VI. of Scotland and James I. of England. It
is recorded of him that never throughout his life could he bear to look
upon drawn steel.

After this Mary summoned Bothwell again and again. It was revealed to
her as in a blaze of light that, after all, he was the one and only man
who could be everything to her. His frankness, his cynicism, his
mockery, his carelessness, his courage, and the power of his mind
matched her moods completely. She threw away all semblance of
concealment. She ignored the fact that he had married at her wish. She
was queen. She desired him. She must have him at any cost.

"Though I lose Scotland and England both," she cried in a passion of
abandonment, "I shall have him for my own!"

Bothwell, in his turn, was nothing loath, and they leaped at each other
like two flames.

It was then that Mary wrote those letters which were afterward
discovered in a casket and which were used against her when she was on
trial for her life. These so-called Casket Letters, though we have not
now the originals, are among the most extraordinary letters ever
written. All shame, all hesitation, all innocence, are flung away in
them. The writer is so fired with passion that each sentence is like a
cry to a lover in the dark. As De Peyster says: "In them the animal
instincts override and spur and lash the pen." Mary was committing to
paper the frenzied madness of a woman consumed to her very marrow by
the scorching blaze of unendurable desire.

Events moved quickly. Darnley, convalescent from an attack of smallpox,
was mysteriously destroyed by an explosion of gunpowder. Bothwell was
divorced from his young wife on curious grounds. A dispensation allowed
Mary to wed a Protestant, and she married Bothwell three months after
Darnley's death.

Here one sees the consummation of what had begun many years before in
France. From the moment that she and Bothwell met, their union was
inevitable. Seas could not sunder them. Other loves and other fancies
were as nothing to them. Even the bonds of marriage were burst asunder
so that these two fiery, panting souls could meet.

It was the irony of fate that when they had so met it was only to be
parted. Mary's subjects, outraged by her conduct, rose against her. As
she passed through the streets of Edinburgh the women hurled after her
indecent names. Great banners were raised with execrable daubs
representing the murdered Darnley. The short and dreadful monosyllable
which is familiar to us in the pages of the Bible was hurled after her
wherever she went.

With Bothwell by her side she led a wild and ragged horde of followers
against the rebellious nobles, whose forces met her at Carberry Hill.
Her motley followers melted away, and Mary surrendered to the hostile
chieftains, who took her to the castle at Lochleven. There she became
the mother of twins--a fact that is seldom mentioned by historians.
These children were the fruit of her union with Bothwell. From this
time forth she cared but little for herself, and she signed, without
great reluctance, a document by which she abdicated in favor of her
infant son.

Even in this place of imprisonment, however, her fascination had power
to charm. Among those who guarded her, two of the Douglas
family--George Douglas and William Douglas--for love of her, effected
her escape. The first attempt failed. Mary, disguised as a laundress,
was betrayed by the delicacy of her hands. But a second attempt was
successful. The queen passed through a postern gate and made her way to
the lake, where George Douglas met her with a boat. Crossing the lake,
fifty horsemen under Lord Claude Hamilton gave her their escort and
bore her away in safety.

But Mary was sick of Scotland, for Bothwell could not be there. She had
tasted all the bitterness of life, and for a few months all the
sweetness; but she would have no more of this rough and barbarous
country. Of her own free will she crossed the Solway into England, to
find herself at once a prisoner.

Never again did she set eyes on Bothwell. After the battle of Carberry
Hill he escaped to the north, gathered some ships together, and preyed
upon English merchantmen, very much as a pirate might have done. Ere
long, however, when he had learned of Mary's fate, he set sail for
Norway. King Frederick of Denmark made him a prisoner of state. He was
not confined within prison walls, however, but was allowed to hunt and
ride in the vicinity of Malmo Castle and of Dragsholm. It is probably
in Malmo Castle that he died. In 1858 a coffin which was thought to be
the coffin of the earl was opened, and a Danish artist sketched the
head--which corresponds quite well with the other portraits of the
ill-fated Scottish noble.

It is a sad story. Had Mary been less ambitious when she first met
Bothwell, or had he been a little bolder, they might have reigned
together and lived out their lives in the plenitude of that great love
which held them both in thrall. But a queen is not as other women; and
she found too late that the teaching of her heart was, after all, the
truest teaching. She went to her death as Bothwell went to his, alone,
in a strange, unfriendly land.

Yet, even this, perhaps, was better so. It has at least touched both
their lives with pathos and has made the name of Mary Stuart one to be
remembered throughout all the ages.




QUEEN CHRISTINA OF SWEDEN AND THE MARQUIS MONALDESCHI


Sweden to-day is one of the peaceful kingdoms of the world, whose
people are prosperous, well governed, and somewhat apart from the clash
and turmoil of other states and nations. Even the secession of Norway,
a few years ago, was accomplished without bloodshed, and now the two
kingdoms exist side by side as free from strife as they are with
Denmark, which once domineered and tyrannized over both.

It is difficult to believe that long ago, in the Middle Ages, the
cities of southern Sweden were among the great commercial centers of
the world. Stockholm and Lund ranked with London and Paris. They
absorbed the commerce of the northern seas, and were the admiration of
thousands of travelers and merchants who passed through them and
trafficked with them.

Much nearer to our own time, Sweden was the great military power of
northern Europe. The ambassadors of the Swedish kings were received
with the utmost deference in every court. Her soldiers won great
battles and ended mighty wars. The England of Cromwell and Charles II.
was unimportant and isolated in comparison with this northern kingdom,
which could pour forth armies of gigantic blond warriors, headed by
generals astute as well as brave.

It was no small matter, then, in 1626, that the loyal Swedes were
hoping that their queen would give birth to a male heir to succeed his
splendid father, Gustavus Adolphus, ranked by military historians as
one of the six great generals whom the world had so far produced. The
queen, a German princess of Brandenburg, had already borne two
daughters, who died in infancy. The expectation was wide-spread and
intense that she should now become the mother of a son; and the king
himself was no less anxious.

When the event occurred, the child was seen to be completely covered
with hair, and for this reason the attendants at first believed that it
was the desired boy. When their mistake was discovered they were afraid
to tell the king, who was waiting in his study for the announcement to
be made. At last, when no one else would go to him, his sister, the
Princess Caroline, volunteered to break the news.

Gustavus was in truth a chivalrous, high-bred monarch. Though he must
have been disappointed at the advent of a daughter, he showed no sign
of dissatisfaction or even of surprise; but, rising, he embraced his
sister, saying:

"Let us thank God. I hope this girl will be as good as a boy to me. May
God preserve her now that He has sent her!"

It is customary at almost all courts to pay less attention to the birth
of a princess than to that of a prince; but Gustavus displayed his
chivalry toward this little daughter, whom he named Christina. He
ordered that the full royal salute should be fired in every fortress of
his kingdom and that displays of fireworks, balls of honor, and court
functions should take place; "for," as he said, "this is the heir to my
throne." And so from the first he took his child under his own keeping
and treated her as if she were a much-loved son as well as a successor.

He joked about her looks when she was born, when she was mistaken for a
boy.

"She will be clever," he said, "for she has taken us all in!"

The Swedish people were as delighted with their little princess as were
the people of Holland when the present Queen Wilhelmina was born, to
carry on the succession of the House of Orange. On one occasion the
king and the small Christina, who were inseparable companions, happened
to approach a fortress where they expected to spend the night. The
commander of the castle was bound to fire a royal salute of fifty
cannon in honor of his sovereign; yet he dreaded the effect upon the
princess of such a roaring and bellowing of artillery. He therefore
sent a swift horseman to meet the royal party at a distance and explain
his perplexity. Should he fire these guns or not? Would the king give
an order?

Gustavus thought for a moment, and then replied:

"My daughter is the daughter of a soldier, and she must learn to lead a
soldier's life. Let the guns be fired!"

The procession moved on. Presently fire spurted from the embrasures of
the fort, and its batteries thundered in one great roar. The king
looked down at Christina. Her face was aglow with pleasure and
excitement; she clapped her hands and laughed, and cried out:

"More bang! More! More! More!"

This is only one of a score of stories that were circulated about the
princess, and the Swedes were more and more delighted with the girl who
was to be their queen.

Somewhat curiously, Christina's mother, Queen Maria, cared little for
the child, and, in fact, came at last to detest her almost as much as
the king loved her. It is hard to explain this dislike. Perhaps she had
a morbid desire for a son and begrudged the honors given to a daughter.
Perhaps she was a little jealous of her own child, who took so much of
the king's attention. Afterward, in writing of her mother, Christina
excuses her, and says quite frankly:

She could not bear to see me, because I was a girl, and an ugly girl at
that. And she was right enough, for I was as tawny as a little Turk.

This candid description of herself is hardly just. Christina was never
beautiful, and she had a harsh voice. She was apt to be overbearing
even as a little girl. Yet she was a most interesting child, with an
expressive face, large eyes, an aquiline nose, and the blond hair of
her people. There was nothing in this to account for her mother's
intense dislike for her.

It was currently reported at the time that attempts were made to maim
or seriously injure the little princess. By what was made to seem an
accident, she would be dropped upon the floor, and heavy articles of
furniture would somehow manage to strike her. More than once a great
beam fell mysteriously close to her, either in the palace or while she
was passing through the streets. None of these things did her serious
harm, however. Most of them she luckily escaped; but when she had grown
to be a woman one of her shoulders was permanently higher than the
other.

"I suppose," said Christina, "that I could be straightened if I would
let the surgeons attend to it; but it isn't worth while to take the
trouble."

When Christina was four, Sweden became involved in the great war that
had been raging for a dozen years between the Protestant and the
Catholic states of Germany. Gradually the neighboring powers had been
drawn into the struggle, either to serve their own ends or to support
the faith to which they adhered. Gustavus Adolphus took up the sword
with mixed motives, for he was full of enthusiasm for the imperiled
cause of the Reformation, and at the same time he deemed it a favorable
opportunity to assert his control over the shores of the Baltic.

The warrior king summoned his army and prepared to invade Germany.
Before departing he took his little daughter by the hand and led her
among the assembled nobles and councilors of state. To them he
intrusted the princess, making them kneel and vow that they would
regard her as his heir, and, if aught should happen to him, as his
successor. Amid the clashing of swords and the clang of armor this vow
was taken, and the king went forth to war.

He met the ablest generals of his enemies, and the fortunes of battle
swayed hither and thither; but the climax came when his soldiers
encountered those of Wallenstein--that strange, overbearing, arrogant,
mysterious creature whom many regarded with a sort of awe. The clash
came at Lutzen, in Saxony. The Swedish king fought long and hard, and
so did his mighty opponent; but at last, in the very midst of a
tremendous onset that swept all before him, Gustavus received a mortal
wound and died, even while Wallenstein was fleeing from the field of
battle.

The battle of Lutzen made Christina Queen of Sweden at the age of six.
Of course, she could not yet be crowned, but a council of able
ministers continued the policy of the late king and taught the young
queen her first lessons in statecraft. Her intellect soon showed itself
as more than that of a child. She understood all that was taking place,
and all that was planned and arranged. Her tact was unusual. Her
discretion was admired by every one; and after a while she had the
advice and training of the great Swedish chancellor, Oxenstierna, whose
wisdom she shared to a remarkable degree.

Before she was sixteen she had so approved herself to her counselors,
and especially to the people at large, that there was a wide-spread
clamor that she should take the throne and govern in her own person. To
this she gave no heed, but said:

"I am not yet ready."

All this time she bore herself like a king. There was nothing
distinctly feminine about her. She took but slight interest in her
appearance. She wore sword and armor in the presence of her troops, and
often she dressed entirely in men's clothes. She would take long,
lonely gallops through the forests, brooding over problems of state and
feeling no fatigue or fear. And indeed why should she fear, who was
beloved by all her subjects?

When her eighteenth year arrived, the demand for her coronation was
impossible to resist. All Sweden wished to see a ruling queen, who
might marry and have children to succeed her through the royal line of
her great father. Christina consented to be crowned, but she absolutely
refused all thought of marriage. She had more suitors from all parts of
Europe than even Elizabeth of England; but, unlike Elizabeth, she did
not dally with them, give them false hopes, or use them for the
political advantage of her kingdom.

At that time Sweden was stronger than England, and was so situated as
to be independent of alliances. So Christina said, in her harsh,
peremptory voice:

"I shall never marry; and why should you speak of my having children! I
am just as likely to give birth to a Nero as to an Augustus."

Having assumed the throne, she ruled with a strictness of government
such as Sweden had not known before. She took the reins of state into
her own hands and carried out a foreign policy of her own, over the
heads of her ministers, and even against the wishes of her people. The
fighting upon the Continent had dragged out to a weary length, but the
Swedes, on the whole, had scored a marked advantage. For this reason
the war was popular, and every one wished it to go on; but Christina,
of her own will, decided that it must stop, that mere glory was not to
be considered against material advantages. Sweden had had enough of
glory; she must now look to her enrichment and prosperity through the
channels of peace.

Therefore, in 1648, against Oxenstierna, against her generals, and
against her people, she exercised her royal power and brought the
Thirty Years' War to an end by the so-called Peace of Westphalia. At
this time she was twenty-two, and by her personal influence she had
ended one of the greatest struggles of history. Nor had she done it to
her country's loss. Denmark yielded up rich provinces, while Germany
was compelled to grant Sweden membership in the German diet.

Then came a period of immense prosperity through commerce, through
economies in government, through the improvement of agriculture and the
opening of mines. This girl queen, without intrigue, without descending
from her native nobility to peep and whisper with shady diplomats,
showed herself in reality a great monarch, a true Semiramis of the
north, more worthy of respect and reverence than Elizabeth of England.
She was highly trained in many arts. She was fond of study, spoke Latin
fluently, and could argue with Salmasius, Descartes, and other
accomplished scholars without showing any inferiority to them.

She gathered at her court distinguished persons from all countries. She
repelled those who sought her hand, and she was pure and truthful and
worthy of all men's admiration. Had she died at this time history would
rank her with the greatest of women sovereigns. Naude, the librarian of
Cardinal Mazarin, wrote of her to the scientist Gassendi in these words:

To say truth, I am sometimes afraid lest the common saying should be
verified in her, that short is the life and rare the old age of those
who surpass the common limits. Do not imagine that she is learned only
in books, for she is equally so in painting, architecture, sculpture,
medals, antiquities, and all curiosities. There is not a cunning
workman in these arts but she has him fetched. There are as good
workers in wax and in enamel, engravers, singers, players, dancers here
as will be found anywhere.

She has a gallery of statues, bronze and marble, medals of gold,
silver, and bronze, pieces of ivory, amber, coral, worked crystal,
steel mirrors, clocks and tables, bas-reliefs and other things of the
kind; richer I have never seen even in Italy; finally, a great quantity
of pictures. In short, her mind is open to all impressions.

But after she began to make her court a sort of home for art and
letters it ceased to be the sort of court that Sweden was prepared for.
Christina's subjects were still rude and lacking in accomplishments;
therefore she had to summon men of genius from other countries,
especially from France and Italy. Many of these were illustrious
artists or scholars, but among them were also some who used their
mental gifts for harm.

Among these latter was a French physician named Bourdelot--a man of
keen intellect, of winning manners, and of a profound cynicism, which
was not apparent on the surface, but the effect of which last lasting.
To Bourdelot we must chiefly ascribe the mysterious change which
gradually came over Queen Christina. With his associates he taught her
a distaste for the simple and healthy life that she had been accustomed
to lead. She ceased to think of the welfare of the state and began to
look down with scorn upon her unsophisticated Swedes. Foreign luxury
displayed itself at Stockholm, and her palaces overflowed with
beautiful things.

By subtle means Bourdelot undermined her principles. Having been a
Stoic, she now became an Epicurean. She was by nature devoid of
sentiment. She would not spend her time in the niceties of love-making,
as did Elizabeth; but beneath the surface she had a sort of tigerish,
passionate nature, which would break forth at intervals, and which
demanded satisfaction from a series of favorites. It is probable that
Bourdelot was her first lover, but there were many others whose names
are recorded in the annals of the time.

When she threw aside her virtue Christina ceased to care about
appearances. She squandered her revenues upon her favorites. What she
retained of her former self was a carelessness that braved the opinion
of her subjects. She dressed almost without thought, and it is said
that she combed her hair not more than twice a month. She caroused with
male companions to the scandal of her people, and she swore like a
trooper when displeased.

Christina's philosophy of life appears to have been compounded of an
almost brutal licentiousness, a strong love of power, and a strange,
freakish longing for something new. Her political ambitions were
checked by the rising discontent of her people, who began to look down
upon her and to feel ashamed of her shame. Knowing herself as she did,
she did not care to marry.

Yet Sweden must have an heir. Therefore she chose out her cousin
Charles, declared that he was to be her successor, and finally caused
him to be proclaimed as such before the assembled estates of the realm.
She even had him crowned; and finally, in her twenty-eighth year, she
abdicated altogether and prepared to leave Sweden. When asked whither
she would go, she replied in a Latin quotation:

"The Fates will show the way."

In her act of abdication she reserved to herself the revenues of some
of the richest provinces in Sweden and absolute power over such of her
subjects as should accompany her. They were to be her subjects until
the end.

The Swedes remembered that Christina was the daughter of their greatest
king, and that, apart from personal scandals, she had ruled them well;
and so they let her go regretfully and accepted her cousin as their
king. Christina, on her side, went joyfully and in the spirit of a
grand adventuress. With a numerous suite she entered Germany, and then
stayed for a year at Brussels, where she renounced Lutheranism. After
this she traveled slowly into Italy, where she entered Borne on
horseback, and was received by the Pope, Alexander VII., who lodged her
in a magnificent palace, accepted her conversion, and baptized her,
giving her a new name, Alexandra.

In Rome she was a brilliant but erratic personage, living sumptuously,
even though her revenues from Sweden came in slowly, partly because the
Swedes disliked her change of religion. She was surrounded by men of
letters, with whom she amused herself, and she took to herself a lover,
the Marquis Monaldeschi. She thought that at last she had really found
her true affinity, while Monaldeschi believed that he could count on
the queen's fidelity.

He was in attendance upon her daily, and they were almost inseparable.
He swore allegiance to her and thereby made himself one of the subjects
over whom she had absolute power. For a time he was the master of those
intense emotions which, in her, alternated with moods of coldness and
even cruelty.

Monaldeschi was a handsome Italian, who bore himself with a fine air of
breeding. He understood the art of charming, but he did not know that
beyond a certain time no one could hold the affections of Christina.

However, after she had quarreled with various cardinals and decided to
leave Rome for a while, Monaldeschi accompanied her to France, where
she had an immense vogue at the court of Louis XIV. She attracted wide
attention because of her eccentricity and utter lack of manners. It
gave her the greatest delight to criticize the ladies of the French
court--their looks, their gowns, and their jewels. They, in return,
would speak of Christina's deformed shoulder and skinny frame; but the
king was very gracious to her and invited her to his hunting-palace at
Fontainebleau.

While she had been winning triumphs of sarcasm the infatuated
Monaldeschi had gradually come to suspect, and then to know, that his
royal mistress was no longer true to him. He had been supplanted in her
favor by another Italian, one Sentanelli, who was the captain of her
guard.

Monaldeschi took a tortuous and roundabout revenge. He did not let the
queen know of his discovery; nor did he, like a man, send a challenge
to Sentanelli. Instead he began by betraying her secrets to Oliver
Cromwell, with whom she had tried to establish a correspondence. Again,
imitating the hand and seal of Sentanelli, he set in circulation a
series of the most scandalous and insulting letters about Christina. By
this treacherous trick he hoped to end the relations between his rival
and the queen; but when the letters were carried to Christina she
instantly recognized their true source. She saw that she was betrayed
by her former favorite and that he had taken a revenge which might
seriously compromise her.

This led to a tragedy, of which the facts were long obscure. They were
carefully recorded, however, by the queen's household chaplain, Father
Le Bel; and there is also a narrative written by one Marco Antonio
Conti, which confirms the story. Both were published privately in 1865,
with notes by Louis Lacour.

The narration of the priest is dreadful in its simplicity and
minuteness of detail. It may be summed up briefly here, because it is
the testimony of an eye-witness who knew Christina.

Christina, with the marquis and a large retinue, was at Fontainebleau
in November, 1657. A little after midnight, when all was still, the
priest, Father Le Bel, was aroused and ordered to go at once to the
Galerie des Cerfs, or Hall of Stags, in another part of the palace.
When he asked why, he was told:

"It is by the order of her majesty the Swedish queen."

The priest, wondering, hurried on his garments. On reaching the gloomy
hall he saw the Marquis Monaldeschi, evidently in great agitation, and
at the end of the corridor the queen in somber robes. Beside the queen,
as if awaiting orders, stood three figures, who could with some
difficulty be made out as three soldiers of her guard.

The queen motioned to Father Le Bel and asked him for a packet which
she had given him for safe-keeping some little time before. He gave it
to her, and she opened it. In it were letters and other documents,
which, with a steely glance, she displayed to Monaldeschi. He was
confused by the sight of them and by the incisive words in which
Christina showed how he had both insulted her and had tried to shift
the blame upon Sentanelli.

Monaldeschi broke down completely. He fell at the queen's feet and wept
piteously, begging for pardon, only to be met by the cold answer:

"You are my subject and a traitor to me. Marquis, you must prepare to
die!"

Then she turned away and left the hall, in spite of the cries of
Monaldeschi, to whom she merely added the advice that he should make
his peace with God by confessing to Father Le Bel.

After she had gone the marquis fell into a torrent of self-exculpation
and cried for mercy. The three armed men drew near and urged him to
confess for the good of his soul. They seemed to have no malice against
him, but to feel that they must obey the orders given them. At the
frantic urging of the marquis their leader even went to the queen to
ask whether she would relent; but he returned shaking his head, and
said:

"Marquis, you must die."

Father Le Bel undertook a like mission, but returned with the message
that there was no hope. So the marquis made his confession in French
and Latin, but even then he hoped; for he did not wait to receive
absolution, but begged still further for delay or pardon.

Then the three armed men approached, having drawn their swords. The
absolution was pronounced; and, following it, one of the guards slashed
the marquis across the forehead. He stumbled and fell forward, making
signs as if to ask that he might have his throat cut. But his throat
was partly protected by a coat of mail, so that three or four strokes
delivered there had slight effect. Finally, however, a long, narrow
sword was thrust into his side, after which the marquis made no sound.

Father Le Bel at once left the Galerie des Cerfs and went into the
queen's apartment, with the smell of blood in his nostrils. He found
her calm and ready to justify herself. Was she not still queen over all
who had voluntarily become members of her suite? This had been agreed
to in her act of abdication. Wherever she set her foot, there, over her
own, she was still a monarch, with full power to punish traitors at her
will. This power she had exercised, and with justice. What mattered it
that she was in France? She was queen as truly as Louis XIV. was king.

The story was not long in getting out, but the truth was not wholly
known until a much later day. It was said that Sentanelli had slapped
the marquis in a fit of jealousy, though some added that it was done
with the connivance of the queen. King Louis, the incarnation of
absolutism, knew the truth, but he was slow to act. He sympathized with
the theory of Christina's sovereignty. It was only after a time that
word was sent to Christina that she must leave Fontainebleau. She took
no notice of the order until it suited her convenience, and then she
went forth with all the honors of a reigning monarch.

This was the most striking episode in all the strange story of her
private life. When her cousin Charles, whom she had made king, died
without an heir she sought to recover her crown; but the estates of the
realm refused her claim, reduced her income, and imposed restraints
upon her power. She then sought the vacant throne of Poland; but the
Polish nobles, who desired a weak ruler for their own purposes, made
another choice. So at last she returned to Rome, where the Pope
received her with a splendid procession and granted her twelve thousand
crowns a year to make up for her lessened Swedish revenue.

From this time she lived a life which she made interesting by her
patronage of learning and exciting by her rather unseemly quarrels with
cardinals and even with the Pope. Her armed retinue marched through the
streets with drawn swords and gave open protection to criminals who had
taken refuge with her. She dared to criticize the pontiff, who merely
smiled and said:

"She is a woman!"

On the whole, the end of her life was pleasant. She was much admired
for her sagacity in politics. Her words were listened to at every court
in Europe. She annotated the classics, she made beautiful collections,
and she was regarded as a privileged person whose acts no one took
amiss. She died at fifty-three, and was buried in St. Peter's.

She was bred a man, she was almost a son to her great father; and yet,
instead of the sonorous epitaph that is inscribed beside her tomb,
perhaps a truer one would be the words of the vexed Pope:

"E DONNA!"




KING CHARLES II. AND NELL GWYN


One might classify the kings of England in many ways. John was
undoubtedly the most unpopular. The impetuous yet far-seeing Henry II.,
with the other two great warriors, Edward I. and Edward III., and
William of Orange, did most for the foundation and development of
England's constitutional law. Some monarchs, such as Edward II. and the
womanish Henry VI., have been contemptible. Hard-working, useful kings
have been Henry VII., the Georges, William IV., and especially the last
Edward.

If we consider those monarchs who have in some curious way touched the
popular fancy without reference to their virtues we must go back to
Richard of the Lion Heart, who saw but little of England, yet was the
best essentially English king, and to Henry V., gallant soldier and
conqueror of France. Even Henry VIII. had a warm place in the affection
of his countrymen, few of whom saw him near at hand, but most of whom
made him a sort of regal incarnation of John Bull--wrestling and
tilting and boxing, eating great joints of beef, and staying his thirst
with flagons of ale--a big, healthy, masterful animal, in fact, who
gratified the national love of splendor and stood up manfully in his
struggle with the Pope.

But if you look for something more than ordinary popularity--something
that belongs to sentiment and makes men willing to become martyrs for a
royal cause--we must find these among the Stuart kings. It is odd,
indeed, that even at this day there are Englishmen and Englishwomen who
believe their lawful sovereign to be a minor Bavarian princess in whose
veins there runs the Stuart blood. Prayers are said for her at English
shrines, and toasts are drunk to her in rare old wine.

Of course, to-day this cult of the Stuarts is nothing but a fad. No one
ever expects to see a Stuart on the English throne. But it is
significant of the deep strain of romance which the six Stuarts who
reigned in England have implanted in the English heart. The old
Jacobite ballads still have power to thrill. Queen Victoria herself
used to have the pipers file out before her at Balmoral to the
"skirling" of "Bonnie Dundee," "Over the Water to Charlie," and "Wha'll
Be King but Charlie!" It is a sentiment that has never died. Her late
majesty used to say that when she heard these tunes she became for the
moment a Jacobite; just as the Empress Eugenie at the height of her
power used pertly to remark that she herself was the only Legitimist
left in France.

It may be suggested that the Stuarts are still loved by many Englishmen
because they were unfortunate; yet this is hardly true, after all. Many
of them were fortunate enough. The first of them, King James, an absurd
creature, speaking broad Scotch, timid, foolishly fond of favorites,
and having none of the dignity of a monarch, lived out a lengthy reign.
The two royal women of the family--Anne and Mary--had no misfortunes of
a public nature. Charles II. reigned for more than a quarter of a
century, lapped in every kind of luxury, and died a king.

The first Charles was beheaded and afterward styled a "saint"; yet the
majority of the English people were against his arrogance, or else he
would have won his great struggle against Parliament. The second James
was not popular at all. Nevertheless, no sooner had he been expelled,
and been succeeded by a Dutchman gnawing asparagus and reeking of
cheeses, than there was already a Stuart legend. Even had there been no
pretenders to carry on the cult, the Stuarts would still have passed
into history as much loved by the people.

It only shows how very little in former days the people expected of a
regnant king. Many monarchs have had just a few popular traits, and
these have stood out brilliantly against the darkness of the background.

No one could have cared greatly for the first James, but Charles I. was
indeed a kingly personage when viewed afar. He was handsome, as a man,
fully equaling the French princess who became his wife. He had no
personal vices. He was brave, and good to look upon, and had a kingly
mien. Hence, although he sought to make his rule over England a
tyranny, there were many fine old cavaliers to ride afield for him when
he raised his standard, and who, when he died, mourned for him as a
"martyr."

Many hardships they underwent while Cromwell ruled with his iron hand;
and when that iron hand was relaxed in death, and poor, feeble Richard
Cromwell slunk away to his country-seat, what wonder is it that young
Charles came back to England and caracoled through the streets of
London with a smile for every one and a happy laugh upon his lips? What
wonder is it that the cannon in the Tower thundered a loud welcome, and
that all over England, at one season or another, maypoles rose and
Christmas fires blazed? For Englishmen at heart are not only
monarchists, but they are lovers of good cheer and merrymaking and all
sorts of mirth.

Charles II. might well at first have seemed a worthier and wiser
successor to his splendid father. As a child, even, he had shown
himself to be no faint-hearted creature. When the great Civil War broke
out he had joined his father's army. It met with disaster at Edgehill,
and was finally shattered by the crushing defeat of Naseby, which
afterward inspired Macaulay's most stirring ballad.

Charles was then only a child of twelve, and so his followers did
wisely in hurrying him out of England, through the Scilly isles and
Jersey to his mother's place of exile. Of course, a child so very young
could be of no value as a leader, though his presence might prove an
inspiration.

In 1648, however, when he was eighteen years of age, he gathered a
fleet of eighteen ships and cruised along the English coast, taking
prizes, which he carried to the Dutch ports. When he was at Holland's
capital, during his father's trial, he wrote many messages to the
Parliamentarians, and even sent them a blank charter, which they might
fill in with any stipulations they desired if only they would save and
restore their king.

When the head of Charles rolled from the velvet-covered block his son
showed himself to be no loiterer or lover of an easy life. He hastened
to Scotland, skilfully escaping an English force, and was proclaimed as
king and crowned at Scone, in 1651. With ten thousand men he dashed
into England, where he knew there were many who would rally at his
call. But it was then that Cromwell put forth his supreme military
genius and with his Ironsides crushed the royal troops at Worcester.

Charles knew that for the present all was lost. He showed courage and
address in covering the flight of his beaten soldiers; but he soon
afterward went to France, remaining there and in the Netherlands for
eight years as a pensioner of Louis XIV. He knew that time would fight
for him far more surely than infantry and horse. England had not been
called "Merry England" for nothing; and Cromwell's tyranny was likely
to be far more resented than the heavy hand of one who was born a king.
So Charles at Paris and Liege, though he had little money at the time,
managed to maintain a royal court, such as it was.

Here there came out another side of his nature. As a child he had borne
hardship and privation and had seen the red blood flow upon the
battlefield. Now, as it were, he allowed a certain sensuous,
pleasure-loving ease to envelop him. The red blood should become the
rich red burgundy; the sound of trumpets and kettledrums should give
way to the melody of lutes and viols. He would be a king of pleasure if
he were to be king at all. And therefore his court, even in exile, was
a court of gallantry and ease. The Pope refused to lend him money, and
the King of France would not increase his pension, but there were many
who foresaw that Charles would not long remain in exile; and so they
gave him what he wanted and waited until he could give them what they
would ask for in their turn.

Charles at this time was not handsome, like his father. His complexion
was swarthy, his figure by no means imposing, though always graceful.
When he chose he could bear himself with all the dignity of a monarch.
He had a singularly pleasant manner, and a word from him could win over
the harshest opponent.

The old cavaliers who accompanied their master in exile were like
Napoleon's veterans in Elba. With their tall, powerful forms they
stalked about the courtyards, sniffing their disapproval at these
foreign ways and longing grimly for the time when they could once more
smell the pungent powder of the battle-field. But, as Charles had
hoped, the change was coming. Not merely were his own subjects
beginning to long for him and to pray in secret for the king, but
continental monarchs who maintained spies in England began to know of
this. To them Charles was no longer a penniless exile. He was a king
who before long would take possession of his kingdom.

A very wise woman--the Queen Regent of Portugal--was the first to act
on this information. Portugal was then very far from being a petty
state. It had wealth at home and rich colonies abroad, while its flag
was seen on every sea. The queen regent, being at odds with Spain, and
wishing to secure an ally against that power, made overtures to
Charles, asking him whether a match might not be made between him and
the Princess Catharine of Braganza. It was not merely her daughter's
hand that she offered, but a splendid dowry. She would pay Charles a
million pounds in gold and cede to England two valuable ports.

The match was not yet made, but by 1659 it had been arranged. The
Spaniards were furious, for Charles's cause began to appear successful.

She was a quaint and rather piteous little figure, she who was destined
to be the wife of the Merry Monarch. Catharine was dark, petite, and by
no means beautiful; yet she had a very sweet expression and a heart of
utter innocence. She had been wholly convent-bred. She knew nothing of
the world. She was told that in marriage she must obey in all things,
and that the chief duty of a wife was to make her husband happy.

Poor child! It was a too gracious preparation for a very graceless
husband. Charles, in exile, had already made more than one
discreditable connection and he was already the father of more than one
growing son.

First of all, he had been smitten by the bold ways of one Lucy Walters.
Her impudence amused the exiled monarch. She was not particularly
beautiful, and when she spoke as others did she was rather tiresome;
but her pertness and the inexperience of the king when he went into
exile made her seem attractive. She bore him a son, in the person of
that brilliant adventurer whom Charles afterward created Duke of
Monmouth. Many persons believe that Charles had married Lucy Walters,
just as George IV. may have married Mrs. Fitzherbert; yet there is not
the slightest proof of it, and it must be classed with popular legends.

There was also one Catherine Peg, or Kep, whose son was afterward made
Earl of Plymouth. It must be confessed that in his attachments to
English women Charles showed little care for rank or station. Lucy
Walters and Catherine Peg were very illiterate creatures.

In a way it was precisely this sort of preference that made Charles so
popular among the people. He seemed to make rank of no account, but
would chat in the most familiar and friendly way with any one whom he
happened to meet. His easy, democratic manner, coupled with the grace
and prestige of royalty, made friends for him all over England. The
treasury might be nearly bankrupt; the navy might be routed by the
Dutch; the king himself might be too much given to dissipation; but his
people forgave him all, because everybody knew that Charles would clap
an honest citizen on the back and joke with all who came to see him
feed the swans in Regent's Park.

The popular name for him was "Rowley," or "Old Rowley"--a nickname of
mysterious origin, though it is said to have been given him from a
fancied resemblance to a famous hunter in his stables. Perhaps it is
the very final test of popularity that a ruler should have a nickname
known to every one.

Cromwell's death roused all England to a frenzy of king-worship. The
Roundhead, General Monk, and his soldiers proclaimed Charles King of
England and escorted him to London in splendid state. That was a day
when national feeling reached a point such as never has been before or
since. Oughtred, the famous mathematician, died of joy when the royal
emblems were restored. Urquhart, the translator of Rabelais, died, it
is said, of laughter at the people's wild delight--a truly Rabelaisian
end.

There was the king once more; and England, breaking through its long
period of Puritanism, laughed and danced with more vivacity than ever
the French had shown. All the pipers and the players and panderers to
vice, the mountebanks, the sensual men, and the lawless women poured
into the presence of the king, who had been too long deprived of the
pleasure that his nature craved. Parliament voted seventy thousand
pounds for a memorial to Charles's father, but the irresponsible king
spent the whole sum on the women who surrounded him. His severest
counselor, Lord Clarendon, sent him a remonstrance.

"How can I build such a memorial," asked Charles, "when I don't know
where my father's remains are buried!"

He took money from the King of France to make war against the Dutch,
who had befriended him. It was the French king, too, who sent him that
insidious, subtle daughter of Brittany, Louise de Keroualle--Duchess of
Portsmouth--a diplomat in petticoats, who won the king's wayward
affections, and spied on what he did and said, and faithfully reported
all of it to Paris. She became the mother of the Duke of Lenox, and she
was feared and hated by the English more than any other of his
mistresses. They called her "Madam Carwell," and they seemed to have an
instinct that she was no mere plaything of his idle hours, but was like
some strange exotic serpent, whose poison might in the end sting the
honor of England.

There is a pitiful little episode in the marriage of Charles with his
Portuguese bride, Catharine of Braganza. The royal girl came to him
fresh from the cloisters of her convent. There was something about her
grace and innocence that touched the dissolute monarch, who was by no
means without a heart. For a time he treated her with great respect,
and she was happy. At last she began to notice about her strange
faces--faces that were evil, wanton, or overbold. The court became more
and more a seat of reckless revelry.

Finally Catharine was told that the Duchess of Cleveland--that splendid
termagant, Barbara Villiers--had been appointed lady of the bedchamber.
She was told at the same time who this vixen was--that she was no fit
attendant for a virtuous woman, and that her three sons, the Dukes of
Southampton, Grafton, and Northumberland, were also the sons of Charles.

Fluttered and frightened and dismayed, the queen hastened to her
husband and begged him not to put this slight upon her. A year or two
before, she had never dreamed that life contained such things as these;
but now it seemed to contain nothing else. Charles spoke sternly to her
until she burst into tears, and then he petted her and told her that
her duty as a queen compelled her to submit to many things which a lady
in private life need not endure.

After a long and poignant struggle with her own emotions the little
Portuguese yielded to the wishes of her lord. She never again
reproached him. She even spoke with kindness to his favorites and made
him feel that she studied his happiness alone. Her gentleness affected
him so that he always spoke to her with courtesy and real friendship.
When the Protestant mobs sought to drive her out of England he showed
his courage and manliness by standing by her and refusing to allow her
to be molested.

Indeed, had Charles been always at his best he would have had a very
different name in history. He could be in every sense a king. He had a
keen knowledge of human nature. Though he governed England very badly,
he never governed it so badly as to lose his popularity.

The epigram of Rochester, written at the king's own request, was
singularly true of Charles. No man relied upon his word, yet men loved
him. He never said anything that was foolish, and he very seldom did
anything that was wise; yet his easy manners and gracious ways endeared
him to those who met him.

One can find no better picture of his court than that which Sir Walter
Scott has drawn so vividly in Peveril of the Peak; or, if one wishes
first-hand evidence, it can be found in the diaries of Evelyn and of
Samuel Pepys. In them we find the rakes and dicers, full of strange
oaths, deep drunkards, vile women and still viler men, all striving for
the royal favor and offering the filthiest lures, amid routs and balls
and noisy entertainments, of which it is recorded that more than once
some woman gave birth to a child among the crowd of dancers.

No wonder that the little Portuguese queen kept to herself and did not
let herself be drawn into this swirling, roaring, roistering
saturnalia. She had less influence even than Moll Davis, whom Charles
picked out of a coffee-house, and far less than "Madam Carwell," to
whom it is reported that a great English nobleman once presented pearls
to the value of eight thousand pounds in order to secure her influence
in a single stroke of political business.

Of all the women who surrounded Charles there was only one who cared
anything for him or for England. The rest were all either selfish or
treacherous or base. This one exception has been so greatly written of,
both in fiction and in history, as to make it seem almost unnecessary
to add another word; yet it may well be worth while to separate the
fiction from the fact and to see how much of the legend of Eleanor Gwyn
is true.

The fanciful story of her birthplace is most surely quite unfounded.
She was not the daughter of a Welsh officer, but of two petty hucksters
who had their booth in the lowest precincts of London. In those days
the Strand was partly open country, and as it neared the city it showed
the mansions of the gentry set in their green-walled parks. At one end
of the Strand, however, was Drury Lane, then the haunt of criminals and
every kind of wretch, while nearer still was the notorious Coal Yard,
where no citizen dared go unarmed.

Within this dreadful place children were kidnapped and trained to
various forms of vice. It was a school for murderers and robbers and
prostitutes; and every night when the torches flared it vomited forth
its deadly spawn. Here was the earliest home of Eleanor Gwyn, and out
of this den of iniquity she came at night to sell oranges at the
entrance to the theaters. She was stage-struck, and endeavored to get
even a minor part in a play; but Betterton, the famous actor, thrust
her aside when she ventured to apply to him.

It must be said that in everything that was external, except her
beauty, she fell short of a fastidious taste. She was intensely
ignorant even for that time. She spoke in a broad Cockney dialect. She
had lived the life of the Coal Yard, and, like Zola's Nana, she could
never remember the time when she had known the meaning of chastity.

Nell Gwyn was, in fact, a product of the vilest slums of London; and
precisely because she was this we must set her down as intrinsically a
good woman--one of the truest, frankest, and most right-minded of whom
the history of such women has anything to tell. All that external
circumstances could do to push her down into the mire was done; yet she
was not pushed down, but emerged as one of those rare souls who have in
their natures an uncontaminated spring of goodness and honesty. Unlike
Barbara Villiers or Lucy Walters or Louise de Keroualle, she was
neither a harpy nor a foe to England.

Charles is said first to have met her when he, incognito, with another
friend, was making the rounds of the theaters at night. The king spied
her glowing, nut-brown face in one of the boxes, and, forgetting his
incognito, went up and joined her. She was with her protector of the
time, Lord Buckhurst, who, of course, recognized his majesty.

Presently the whole party went out to a neighboring coffee-house, where
they drank and ate together. When it came time to pay the reckoning the
king found that he had no money, nor had his friend. Lord Buckhurst,
therefore, paid the bill, while Mistress Nell jeered at the other two,
saying that this was the most poverty-stricken party that she had ever
met.

Charles did not lose sight of her. Her frankness and honest manner
pleased him. There came a time when she was known to be a mistress of
the king, and she bore a son, who was ennobled as the Duke of St.
Albans, but who did not live to middle age. Nell Gwyn was much with
Charles; and after his tempestuous scenes with Barbara Villiers, and
the feeling of dishonor which the Duchess of Portsmouth made him
experience, the girl's good English bluntness was a pleasure far more
rare than sentiment.

Somehow, just as the people had come to mistrust "Madam Carwell," so
they came to like Nell Gwyn. She saw enough of Charles, and she liked
him well enough, to wish that he might do his duty by his people; and
she alone had the boldness to speak out what she thought. One day she
found him lolling in an arm-chair and complaining that the people were
not satisfied.

"You can very easily satisfy them," said Nell Gwyn. "Dismiss your women
and attend to the proper business of a king."

Again, her heart was touched at the misfortunes of the old soldiers who
had fought for Charles and for his father during the Civil War, and who
were now neglected, while the treasury was emptied for French
favorites, and while the policy of England itself was bought and sold
in France. Many and many a time, when other women of her kind used
their lures to get jewels or titles or estates or actual heaps of
money, Nell Gwyn besought the king to aid these needy veterans. Because
of her efforts Chelsea Hospital was founded. Such money as she had she
shared with the poor and with those who had fought for her royal lover.

As I have said, she is a historical type of the woman who loses her
physical purity, yet who retains a sense of honor and of honesty which
nothing can take from her. There are not many such examples, and
therefore this one is worth remembering.

Of anecdotes concerning her there are many, but not often has their
real import been detected. If she could twine her arms about the
monarch's neck and transport him in a delirium of passion, this was
only part of what she did. She tried to keep him right and true and
worthy of his rank; and after he had ceased to care much for her as a
lover he remembered that she had been faithful in many other things.

Then there came the death-bed scene, when Charles, in his inimitable
manner, apologized to those about him because he was so long in dying.
A far sincerer sentence was that which came from his heart, as he cried
out, in the very pangs of death:

"Do not let poor Nelly starve!"




MAURICE OF SAXONY AND ADRIENNE LECOUVREUR


It is an old saying that to every womanly woman self-sacrifice is
almost a necessity of her nature. To make herself of small account as
compared with the one she loves; to give freely of herself, even though
she may receive nothing in return; to suffer, and yet to feel an inner
poignant joy in all this suffering--here is a most wonderful trait of
womanhood. Perhaps it is akin to the maternal instinct; for to the
mother, after she has felt the throb of a new life within her, there is
no sacrifice so great and no anguish so keen that she will not welcome
it as the outward sign and evidence of her illimitable love.

In most women this spirit of self-sacrifice is checked and kept within
ordinary bounds by the circumstances of their lives. In many small
things they do yield and they do suffer; yet it is not in yielding and
in suffering that they find their deepest joy.

There are some, however, who seem to have been born with an abnormal
capacity for enduring hardship and mental anguish; so that by a sort of
contradiction they find their happiness in sorrow. Such women are
endowed with a remarkable degree of sensibility. They feel intensely.
In moments of grief and disappointment, and even of despair, there
steals over them a sort of melancholy pleasure. It is as if they loved
dim lights and mournful music and scenes full of sad suggestion.

If everything goes well with them, they are unwilling to believe that
such good fortune will last. If anything goes wrong with them, they are
sure that this is only the beginning of something even worse. The music
of their lives is written in a minor key.

Now, for such women as these, the world at large has very little
charity. It speaks slightingly of them as "agonizers." It believes that
they are "fond of making scenes." It regards as an affectation
something that is really instinctive and inevitable. Unless such women
are beautiful and young and charming they are treated badly; and this
is often true in spite of all their natural attractiveness, for they
seem to court ill usage as if they were saying frankly:

"Come, take us! We will give you everything and ask for nothing. We do
not expect true and enduring love. Do not be constant or generous or
even kind. We know that we shall suffer. But, none the less, in our
sorrow there will be sweetness, and even in our abasement we shall feel
a sort of triumph."

In history there is one woman who stands out conspicuously as a type of
her melancholy sisterhood, one whose life was full of disappointment
even when she was most successful, and of indignity even when she was
most sought after and admired. This woman was Adrienne Lecouvreur,
famous in the annals of the stage, and still more famous in the annals
of unrequited--or, at any rate, unhappy--love.

Her story is linked with that of a man no less remarkable than herself,
a hero of chivalry, a marvel of courage, of fascination, and of
irresponsibility.

Adrienne Lecouvreur--her name was originally Couvreur--was born toward
the end of the seventeenth century in the little French village of
Damery, not far from Rheims, where her aunt was a laundress and her
father a hatter in a small way. Of her mother, who died in childbirth,
we know nothing; but her father was a man of gloomy and ungovernable
temper, breaking out into violent fits of passion, in one of which,
long afterward, he died, raving and yelling like a maniac.

Adrienne was brought up at the wash-tub, and became accustomed to a
wandering life, in which she went from one town to another. What she
had inherited from her mother is, of course, not known; but she had all
her father's strangely pessimistic temper, softened only by the fact
that she was a girl. From her earliest years she was unhappy; yet her
unhappiness was largely of her own choosing. Other girls of her own
station met life cheerfully, worked away from dawn till dusk, and then
had their moments of amusement, and even jollity, with their
companions, after the fashion of all children. But Adrienne Lecouvreur
was unhappy because she chose to be. It was not the wash-tub that made
her so, for she had been born to it; nor was it the half-mad outbreaks
of her father, because to her, at least, he was not unkind. Her
discontent sprang from her excessive sensibility.

Indeed, for a peasant child she had reason to think herself far more
fortunate than her associates. Her intelligence was great. Ambition was
awakened in her before she was ten years of age, when she began to
learn and to recite poems--learning them, as has been said, "between
the wash-tub and the ironing-board," and reciting them to the
admiration of older and wiser people than she. Even at ten she was a
very beautiful child, with great lambent eyes, an exquisite complexion,
and a lovely form, while she had the further gift of a voice that
thrilled the listener and, when she chose, brought tears to every eye.
She was, indeed, a natural elocutionist, knowing by instinct all those
modulations of tone and varied cadences which go to the hearer's heart.

It was very like Adrienne Lecouvreur to memorize only such poems as
were mournful, just as in after life she could win success upon the
stage only in tragic parts. She would repeat with a sort of ecstasy the
pathetic poems that were then admired; and she was soon able to give up
her menial work, because many people asked her to their houses so that
they could listen to the divinely beautiful voice charged with the
emotion which was always at her command.

When she was thirteen her father moved to Paris, where she was placed
at school--a very humble school in a very humble quarter of the city.
Yet even there her genius showed itself at that early age. A number of
children and young people, probably influenced by Adrienne, formed
themselves into a theatrical company from the pure love of acting. A
friendly grocer let them have an empty store-room for their
performances, and in this store-room Adrienne Lecouvreur first acted in
a tragedy by Corneille, assuming the part of leading woman.

Her genius for the stage was like the genius of Napoleon for war. She
had had no teaching. She had never been inside of any theater; and yet
she delivered the magnificent lines with all the power and fire and
effectiveness of a most accomplished actress. People thronged to see
her and to feel the tempest of emotion which shook her as she sustained
her part, which for the moment was as real to her as life itself.

At first only the people of the neighborhood knew anything about these
amateur performances; but presently a lady of rank, one Mme. du Gue,
came out of curiosity and was fascinated by the little actress. Mme. du
Gue offered the spacious courtyard of her own house, and fitted it with
some of the appurtenances of a theater. From that moment the fame of
Adrienne spread throughout all Paris. The courtyard was crowded by
gentlemen and ladies, by people of distinction from the court, and at
last even by actors and actresses from the Comedie Franchise.

It is, in fact, a remarkable tribute to Adrienne that in her thirteenth
year she excited so much jealousy among the actors of the Comedie that
they evoked the law against her. Theaters required a royal license, and
of course poor little Adrienne's company had none. Hence legal
proceedings were begun, and the most famous actresses in Paris talked
of having these clever children imprisoned! Upon this the company
sought the precincts of the Temple, where no legal warrant could be
served without the express order of the king himself.

There for a time the performances still went on. Finally, as the other
children were not geniuses, but merely boys and girls in search of fun,
the little company broke up. Its success, however, had determined for
ever the career of Adrienne. With her beautiful face, her lithe and
exquisite figure, her golden voice, and her instinctive art, it was
plain enough that her future lay upon the stage; and so at fourteen or
fifteen she began where most actresses leave off--accomplished and
attractive, and having had a practical training in her profession.

Diderot, in that same century, observed that the truest actor is one
who does not feel his part at all, but produces his effects by
intellectual effort and intelligent observation. Behind the figure on
the stage, torn with passion or rollicking with mirth, there must
always be the cool and unemotional mind which directs and governs and
controls. This same theory was both held and practised by the late
Benoit Constant Coquelin. To some extent it was the theory of Garrick
and Fechter and Edwin Booth; though it was rejected by the two Keans,
and by Edwin Forrest, who entered so throughly into the character which
he assumed, and who let loose such tremendous bursts of passion that
other actors dreaded to support him on the stage in such parts as
Spartacus and Metamora.

It is needless to say that a girl like Adrienne Lecouvreur flung
herself with all the intensity of her nature into every role she
played. This was the greatest secret of her success; for, with her,
nature rose superior to art. On the other hand, it fixed her dramatic
limitations, for it barred her out of comedy. Her melancholy, morbid
disposition was in the fullest sympathy with tragic heroines; but she
failed when she tried to represent the lighter moods and the merry
moments of those who welcome mirth. She could counterfeit despair, and
unforced tears would fill her eyes; but she could not laugh and romp
and simulate a gaiety that was never hers.

Adrienne would have been delighted to act at one of the theaters in
Paris; but they were closed to her through jealousy. She went into the
provinces, in the eastern part of France, and for ten years she was a
leading lady there in many companies and in many towns. As she
blossomed into womanhood there came into her life the love which was to
be at once a source of the most profound interest and of the most
intense agony.

It is odd that all her professional success never gave her any
happiness. The life of the actress who traveled from town to town, the
crude and coarse experiences which she had to undergo, the disorder and
the unsettled mode of living, all produced in her a profound disgust.
She was of too exquisite a fiber to live in such a way, especially in a
century when the refinements of existence were for the very few.

She speaks herself of "obligatory amusements, the insistence of men,
and of love affairs." Yet how could such a woman as Adrienne Lecouvreur
keep herself from love affairs? The motion of the stage and its mimic
griefs satisfied her only while she was actually upon the boards. Love
offered her an emotional excitement that endured and that was always
changing. It was "the profoundest instinct of her being"; and she once
wrote: "What could one do in the world without loving?"

Still, through these ten years she seems to have loved only that she
might be unhappy. There was a strange twist in her mind. Men who were
honorable and who loved her with sincerity she treated very badly. Men
who were indifferent or ungrateful or actually base she seemed to
choose by a sort of perverse instinct. Perhaps the explanation of it is
that during those ten years, though she had many lovers, she never
really loved. She sought excitement, passion, and after that the
mournfulness which comes when passion dies. Thus, one man after another
came into her life--some of them promising marriage--and she bore two
children, whose fathers were unknown, or at least uncertain. But, after
all, one can scarcely pity her, since she had not yet in reality known
that great passion which comes but once in life. So far she had learned
only a sort of feeble cynicism, which she expressed in letters and in
such sayings as these:

"There are sweet errors which I would not venture to commit again. My
experiences, all too sad, have served to illumine my reason."

"I am utterly weary of love and prodigiously tempted to have no more of
it for the rest of my life; because, after all, I don't wish either to
die or to go mad."

Yet she also said: "I know too well that no one dies of grief."

She had had, indeed, some very unfortunate experiences. Men of rank had
loved her and had then cast her off. An actor, one Clavel, would have
married her, but she would not accept his offer. A magistrate in
Strasburg promised marriage; and then, when she was about to accept
him, he wrote to her that he was going to yield to the wishes of his
family and make a more advantageous alliance. And so she was
alternately caressed and repulsed--a mere plaything; and yet this was
probably all that she really needed at the time--something to stir her,
something to make her mournful or indignant or ashamed.

It was inevitable that at last Adrienne Lecouvreur should appear in
Paris. She had won such renown throughout the provinces that even those
who were intensely jealous of her were obliged to give her due
consideration. In 1717, when she was in her twenty-fifth year, she
became a member of the Comedie Franchise. There she made an immediate
and most brilliant impression. She easily took the leading place. She
was one of the glories of Paris, for she became the fashion outside the
theater. For the first time the great classic plays were given, not in
the monotonous singsong which had become a sort of theatrical
convention, but with all the fire and naturalness of life.

Being the fashion, Mlle. Lecouvreur elevated the social rank of actors
and of actresses. Her salon was thronged by men and women of rank.
Voltaire wrote poems in her honor. To be invited to her dinners was
almost like receiving a decoration from the king. She ought to have
been happy, for she had reached the summit of her profession and
something more.

Yet still she was unhappy. In all her letters one finds a plaintive
tone, a little moaning sound that shows how slightly her nature had
been changed. No longer, however, did she throw herself away upon
dullards or brutes. An English peer--Lord Peterborough--not realizing
that she was different from other actresses of that loose-lived age,
said to her coarsely at his first introduction:

"Come now! Show me lots of wit and lots of love."

The remark was characteristic of the time. Yet Adrienne had learned at
least one thing, and that was the discontent which came from light
affairs. She had thrown herself away too often. If she could not love
with her entire being, if she could not give all that was in her to be
given, whether of her heart or mind or soul, then she would love no
more at all.

At this time there came to Paris a man remarkable in his own century,
and one who afterward became almost a hero of romance. This was
Maurice, Comte de Saxe, as the French called him, his German name and
title being Moritz, Graf von Sachsen, while we usually term him, in
English, Marshal Saxe. Maurice de Saxe was now, in 1721, entering his
twenty-fifth year. Already, though so young, his career had been a
strange one; and it was destined to be still more remarkable. He was
the natural son of Duke Augustus II. of Saxony, who later became King
of Poland, and who is known in history as Augustus the Strong.

Augustus was a giant in stature and in strength, handsome, daring,
unscrupulous, and yet extremely fascinating. His life was one of
revelry and fighting and display. When in his cups he would often call
for a horseshoe and twist it into a knot with his powerful fingers.
Many were his mistresses; but the one for whom he cared the most was a
beautiful and high-spirited Swedish girl of rank, Aurora von
Konigsmarck. She was descended from a rough old field-marshal who in
the Thirty Years' War had slashed and sacked and pillaged and plundered
to his heart's content. From him Aurora von Konigsmarck seemed to have
inherited a high spirit and a sort of lawlessness which charmed the
stalwart Augustus of Poland.

Their son, Maurice de Saxe, inherited everything that was good in his
parents, and a great deal that was less commendable. As a mere child of
twelve he had insisted on joining the army of Prince Eugene, and had
seen rough service in a very strenuous campaign. Two years later he
showed such daring on the battle-field that Prince Eugene summoned him
and paid him a compliment under the form of a rebuke.

"Young man," he said, "you must not mistake mere recklessness for
valor."

Before he was twenty he had attained the stature and strength of his
royal father; and, to prove it, he in his turn called for a horseshoe,
which he twisted and broke in his fingers. He fought on the side of the
Russians and Poles, and again against the Turks, everywhere displaying
high courage and also genius as a commander; for he never lost his
self-possession amid the very blackest danger, but possessed, as
Carlyle says, "vigilance, foresight, and sagacious precaution."

Exceedingly handsome, Maurice was a master of all the arts that
pleased, with just a touch of roughness, which seemed not unfitting in
so gallant a soldier. His troops adored him and would follow wherever
he might choose to lead them; for he exercised over these rude men a
magnetic power resembling that of Napoleon in after years. In private
life he was a hard drinker and fond of every form of pleasure. Having
no fortune of his own, a marriage was arranged for him with the
Countess von Loben, who was immensely wealthy; but in three years he
had squandered all her money upon his pleasures, and had, moreover, got
himself heavily in debt.

It was at this time that he first came to Paris to study military
tactics. He had fought hard against the French in the wars that were
now ended; but his chivalrous bearing, his handsome person, and his
reckless joviality made him at once a universal favorite in Paris. To
the perfumed courtiers, with their laces and lovelocks and mincing
ways, Maurice de Saxe came as a sort of knight of old--jovial, daring,
pleasure-loving. Even his broken French was held to be quite charming;
and to see him break a horseshoe with his fingers threw every one into
raptures.

No wonder, then, that he was welcomed in the very highest circles.
Almost at once he attracted the notice of the Princesse de Conti, a
beautiful woman of the blood royal. Of her it has been said that she
was "the personification of a kiss, the incarnation of an embrace, the
ideal of a dream of love." Her chestnut hair was tinted with little
gleams of gold. Her eyes were violet black. Her complexion was
dazzling. But by the king's orders she had been forced to marry a
hunchback--a man whose very limbs were so weakened by disease and evil
living that they would often fail to support him, and he would fall to
the ground, a writhing, screaming mass of ill-looking flesh.

It is not surprising that his lovely wife should have shuddered much at
his abuse of her and still more at his grotesque endearments. When her
eyes fell on Maurice de Saxe she saw in him one who could free her from
her bondage. By a skilful trick he led the Prince de Conti to invade
the sleeping-room of the princess, with servants, declaring that she
was not alone. The charge proved quite untrue, and so she left her
husband, having won the sympathy of her own world, which held that she
had been insulted. But it was not she who was destined to win and hold
the love of Maurice de Saxe.

Not long after his appearance in the French capital he was invited to
dine with the "Queen of Paris," Adrienne Lecouvreur. Saxe had seen her
on the stage. He knew her previous history. He knew that she was very
much of a soiled dove; but when he met her these two natures, so
utterly dissimilar, leaped together, as it were, through the
indescribable attraction of opposites. He was big and powerful; she was
small and fragile. He was merry, and full of quips and jests; she was
reserved and melancholy. Each felt in the other a need supplied.

At one of their earliest meetings the climax came. Saxe was not the man
to hesitate; while she already, in her thoughts, had made a full
surrender. In one great sweep he gathered her into his arms. It
appeared to her as if no man had ever laid his hand upon her until that
moment. She cried out:

"Now, for the first time in my life, I seem to live!"

It was, indeed, the very first love which in her checkered career was
really worthy of the name. She had supposed that all such things were
passed and gone, that her heart was closed for ever, that she was
invulnerable; and yet here she found herself clinging about the neck of
this impetuous soldier and showing him all the shy fondness and the
unselfish devotion of a young girl. From this instant Adrienne
Lecouvreur never loved another man and never even looked at any other
man with the slightest interest. For nine long years the two were bound
together, though there were strange events to ruffle the surface of
their love.

Maurice de Saxe had been sired by a king. He had the lofty ambition to
be a king himself, and he felt the stirrings of that genius which in
after years was to make him a great soldier, and to win the brilliant
victory of Fontenoy, which to this very day the French are never tired
of recalling. Already Louis XV. had made him a marshal of France; and a
certain restlessness came over him. He loved Adrienne; yet he felt that
to remain in the enjoyment of her witcheries ought not to be the whole
of a man's career.

Then the Grand Duchy of Courland--at that time a vassal state of
Poland, now part of Russia--sought a ruler. Maurice de Saxe was eager
to secure its throne, which would make him at least semi-royal and the
chief of a principality. He hastened thither and found that money was
needed to carry out his plans. The widow of the late duke--the Grand
Duchess Anna, niece of Peter the Great, and later Empress of Russia--as
soon as she had met this dazzling genius, offered to help him to
acquire the duchy if he would only marry her. He did not utterly
refuse. Still another woman of high rank, the Grand Duchess Elizabeth
of Russia, Peter the Great's daughter, made him very much the same
proposal.

Both of these imperial women might well have attracted a man like
Maurice de Saxe, had he been wholly fancy-free, for the second of them
inherited the high spirit and the genius of the great Peter, while the
first was a pleasure-seeking princess, resembling some of those Roman
empresses who loved to stoop that they might conquer. She is described
as indolent and sensual, and she once declared that the chief good in
the world was love. Yet, though she neglected affairs of state and gave
them over to favorites, she won and kept the affections of her people.
She was unquestionably endowed with the magnetic gift of winning hearts.

Adrienne, who was left behind in Paris, knew very little of what was
going on. Only two things were absolutely clear to her. One was that if
her lover secured the duchy he must be parted from her. The other was
that without money his ambition must be thwarted, and that he would
then return to her. Here was a test to try the soul of any woman. It
proved the height and the depth of her devotion. Come what might,
Maurice should be Duke of Courland, even though she lost him. She
gathered together her whole fortune, sold every jewel that she
possessed, and sent her lover the sum of nearly a million francs.

This incident shows how absolutely she was his. But in fact, because of
various intrigues, he failed of election to the ducal throne of
Courland, and he returned to Adrienne with all her money spent, and
without even the grace, at first, to show his gratitude. He stormed and
raged over his ill luck. She merely soothed and petted him, though she
had heard that he had thought of marrying another woman to secure the
dukedom. In one of her letters she bursts out with the pitiful
exclamation:

I am distracted with rage and anguish. Is it not natural to cry out
against such treachery? This man surely ought to know me--he ought to
love me. Oh, my God! What are we--what ARE we?

But still she could not give him up, nor could he give her up, though
there were frightful scenes between them--times when he cruelly
reproached her and when her native melancholy deepened into outbursts
of despair. Finally there occurred an incident which is more or less
obscure in parts. The Duchesse de Bouillon, a great lady of the
court--facile, feline, licentious, and eager for delights--resolved
that she would win the love of Maurice de Saxe. She set herself to win
it openly and without any sense of shame. Maurice himself at times,
when the tears of Adrienne proved wearisome, flirted with the duchess.

Yet, even so, Adrienne held the first place in his heart, and her rival
knew it. Therefore she resolved to humiliate Adrienne, and to do so in
the place where the actress had always reigned supreme. There was to be
a gala performance of Racine's great tragedy, "Phedre," with Adrienne,
of course, in the title-role. The Duchesse de Bouillon sent a large
number of her lackeys with orders to hiss and jeer, and, if possible,
to break off the play. Malignantly delighted with her plan, the duchess
arrayed herself in jewels and took her seat in a conspicuous stage-box,
where she could watch the coming storm and gloat over the discomfiture
of her rival.

When the curtain rose, and when Adrienne appeared as Phedre, an uproar
began. It was clear to the great actress that a plot had been devised
against her. In an instant her whole soul was afire. The queen-like
majesty of her bearing compelled silence throughout the house. Even the
hired lackeys were overawed by it. Then Adrienne moved swiftly across
the stage and fronted her enemy, speaking into her very face the three
insulting lines which came to her at that moment of the play:

    I am not of those women void of shame,
    Who, savoring in crime the joys of peace,
    Harden their faces till they cannot blush!

The whole house rose and burst forth into tremendous applause. Adrienne
had won, for the woman who had tried to shame her rose in trepidation
and hurried from the theater.

But the end was not yet. Those were evil times, when dark deeds were
committed by the great almost with impunity. Secret poisoning was a
common trade. To remove a rival was as usual a thing in the eighteenth
century as to snub a rival is usual in the twentieth.

Not long afterward, on the night of March 15, 1730, Adrienne Lecouvreur
was acting in one of Voltaire's plays with all her power and
instinctive art when suddenly she was seized with the most frightful
pains. Her anguish was obvious to every one who saw her, and yet she
had the courage to go through her part. Then she fainted and was
carried home.

Four days later she died, and her death was no less dramatic than her
life had been. Her lover and two friends of his were with her, and also
a Jesuit priest. He declined to administer extreme unction unless she
would declare that she repented of her theatrical career. She
stubbornly refused, since she believed that to be the greatest actress
of her time was not a sin. Yet still the priest insisted.

Then came the final moment.

"Weary and revolting against this death, this destiny, she stretched
her arms with one of the old lovely gestures toward a bust which stood
near by and cried--her last cry of passion:

"'There is my world, my hope--yes, and my God!'"

The bust was one of Maurice de Saxe.




THE STORY OF PRINCE CHARLES EDWARD STUART


The royal families of Europe are widely known, yet not all of them are
equally renowned. Thus, the house of Romanoff, although comparatively
young, stands out to the mind with a sort of barbaric power, more
vividly than the Austrian house of Hapsburg, which is the oldest
reigning family in Europe, tracing its beginnings backward until they
are lost in the Dark Ages. The Hohenzollerns of Prussia are
comparatively modern, so far as concerns their royalty. The offshoots
of the Bourbons carry on a very proud tradition in the person of the
King of Spain, although France, which has been ruled by so many members
of the family, will probably never again behold a Bourbon king. The
deposed Braganzas bear a name which is ancient, but which has a
somewhat tinsel sound.

The Bonapartes, of course, are merely parvenus, and they have had the
good taste to pretend to no antiquity of birth. The first Napoleon,
dining at a table full of monarchs, when he heard one of them
deferentially alluding to the Bonaparte family as being very old and
noble, exclaimed:

"Pish! My nobility dates from the day of Marengo!"

And the third Napoleon, in announcing his coming marriage with Mlle. de
Montijo, used the very word "parvenu" in speaking of himself and of his
family. His frankness won the hearts of the French people and helped to
reconcile them to a marriage in which the bride was barely noble.

In English history there are two great names to conjure by, at least to
the imaginative. One is Plantagenet, which seems to contain within
itself the very essence of all that is patrician, magnificent, and
royal. It calls to memory at once the lion-hearted Richard, whose short
reign was replete with romance in England and France and Austria and
the Holy Land.

But perhaps a name of greater influence is that which links the royal
family of Britain today with the traditions of the past, and which
summons up legend and story and great deeds of history. This is the
name of Stuart, about which a whole volume might be written to recall
its suggestions and its reminiscences.

The first Stuart (then Stewart) of whom anything is known got his name
from the title of "Steward of Scotland," which remained in the family
for generations, until the sixth of the line, by marriage with Princess
Marjory Bruce, acquired the Scottish crown. That was in the early years
of the fourteenth century; and finally, after the death of Elizabeth of
England, her rival's son, James VI. of Scotland and I. of England,
united under one crown two kingdoms that had so long been at almost
constant war.

It is almost characteristic of the Scot that, having small territory,
little wealth, and a seat among his peers that is almost ostentatiously
humble, he should bit by bit absorb the possessions of all the rest and
become their master. Surely, the proud Tudors, whose line ended with
Elizabeth, must have despised the "Stewards," whose kingdom was small
and bleak and cold, and who could not control their own vassals.

One can imagine also, with Sir Walter Scott, the haughty nobles of the
English court sneering covertly at the awkward, shambling James, pedant
and bookworm. Nevertheless, his diplomacy was almost as good as that of
Elizabeth herself; and, though he did some foolish things, he was very
far from being a fool.

In his appearance James was not unlike Abraham Lincoln--an unkingly
figure; and yet, like Lincoln, when occasion required it he could rise
to the dignity which makes one feel the presence of a king. He was the
only Stuart who lacked anything in form or feature or external grace.
His son, Charles I., was perhaps one of the worst rulers that England
has ever had; yet his uprightness of life, his melancholy yet handsome
face, his graceful bearing, and the strong religious element in his
character, together with the fact that he was put to death after being
treacherously surrendered to his enemies--all these have combined to
make almost a saint of him. There are Englishmen to-day who speak of
him as "the martyr king," and who, on certain days of the year, say
prayers that beg the Lord's forgiveness because of Charles's execution.

The members of the so-called League of the White Rose, founded to
perpetuate English allegiance to the direct line of Stuarts, do many
things that are quite absurd. They refuse to pray for the present King
of England and profess to think that the Princess Mary of Bavaria is
the true ruler of Great Britain. All this represents that trace of
sentiment which lingers among the English to-day. They feel that the
Stuarts were the last kings of England to rule by the grace of God
rather than by the grace of Parliament. As a matter of fact, the
present reigning family in England is glad to derive its ancient strain
of royal blood through a Stuart--descended on the distaff side from
James I., and winding its way through Hanover.

This sentiment for the Stuarts is a thing entirely apart from reason
and belongs to the realm of poetry and romance; yet so strong is it
that it has shown itself in the most inconsistent fashion. For
instance, Sir Walter Scott was a devoted adherent of the house of
Hanover. When George IV. visited Edinburgh, Scott was completely
carried away by his loyal enthusiasm. He could not see that the man
before him was a drunkard and braggart. He viewed him as an incarnation
of all the noble traits that ought to hedge about a king. He snatched
up a wine-glass from which George had just been drinking and carried it
away to be an object of reverence for ever after. Nevertheless, in his
heart, and often in his speech, Scott seemed to be a high Tory, and
even a Jacobite.

There are precedents for this. The Empress Eugenie used often to say
with a laugh that she was the only true royalist at the imperial court
of France. That was well enough for her in her days of flightiness and
frivolity. No one, however, accused Queen Victoria of being frivolous,
and she was not supposed to have a strong sense of humor. None the
less, after listening to the skirling of the bagpipes and to the
romantic ballads which were sung in Scotland she is said to have
remarked with a sort of sigh:

"Whenever I hear those ballads I feel that England belongs really to
the Stuarts!"

Before Queen Victoria was born, when all the sons of George III. were
childless, the Duke of Kent was urged to marry, so that he might have a
family to continue the succession. In resenting the suggestion he said
many things, and among them this was the most striking:

"Why don't you call the Stuarts back to England? They couldn't possibly
make a worse mess of it than our fellows have!"

But he yielded to persuasion and married. From this marriage came
Victoria, who had the sacred drop of Stuart blood which gave England to
the Hanoverians; and she was to redeem the blunders and tyrannies of
both houses.

The fascination of the Stuarts, which has been carried overseas to
America and the British dominions, probably began with the striking
history of Mary Queen of Scots. Her brilliancy and boldness and beauty,
and especially the pathos of her end, have made us see only her intense
womanliness, which in her own day was the first thing that any one
observed in her. So, too, with Charles I., romantic figure and knightly
gentleman. One regrets his death upon the scaffold, even though his
execution was necessary to the growth of freedom.

Many people are no less fascinated by Charles II., that very different
type, with his gaiety, his good-fellowship, and his easy-going ways. It
is not surprising that his people, most of whom never saw him, were
very fond of him, and did not know that he was selfish, a loose liver,
and almost a vassal of the king of France.

So it is not strange that the Stuarts, with all their arts and graces,
were very hard to displace. James II., with the aid of the French,
fought hard before the British troops in Ireland broke the backs of
both his armies and sent him into exile. Again in 1715--an episode
perpetuated in Thackeray's dramatic story of Henry Esmond--came the son
of James to take advantage of the vacancy caused by the death of Queen
Anne. But it is perhaps to this claimant's son, the last of the
militant Stuarts, that more chivalrous feeling has been given than to
any other.

To his followers he was the Young Chevalier, the true Prince of Wales;
to his enemies, the Whigs and the Hanoverians, he was "the Pretender."
One of the most romantic chapters of history is the one which tells of
that last brilliant dash which he made upon the coast of Scotland,
landing with but a few attendants and rejecting the support of a French
army.

"It is not with foreigners," he said, "but with my own loyal subjects,
that I wish to regain the kingdom for my father."

It was a daring deed, and the spectacular side of it has been often
commemorated, especially in Sir Walter Scott's Waverley. There we see
the gallant prince moving through a sort of military panorama. Most of
the British troops were absent in Flanders, and the few regiments that
could be mustered to meet him were appalled by the ferocity and
reckless courage of the Highlanders, who leaped down like wildcats from
their hills and flung themselves with dirk and sword upon the British
cannon.

We see Sir John Cope retiring at Falkirk, and the astonishing victory
of Prestonpans, where disciplined British troops fled in dismay through
the morning mist, leaving artillery and supplies behind them. It is
Scott again who shows us the prince, master of Edinburgh for a time,
while the white rose of Stuart royalty held once more the ancient keep
above the Scottish capital. Then we see the Chevalier pressing
southward into England, where he hoped to raise an English army to
support his own. But his Highlanders cared nothing for England, and the
English--even the Catholic gentry--would not rise to support his cause.

Personally, he had every gift that could win allegiance. Handsome,
high-tempered, and brave, he could also control his fiery spirit and
listen to advice, however unpalatable it might be.

The time was favorable. The British troops had been defeated on the
Continent by Marshal Saxe, of whom I have already written, and by
Marshal d'Estrees. George II. was a king whom few respected. He could
scarcely speak anything but German. He grossly ill-treated his wife. It
is said that on one occasion, in a fit of temper, he actually kicked
the prime minister. Not many felt any personal loyalty to him, and he
spent most of his time away from England in his other domain of Hanover.

But precisely here was a reason why Englishmen were willing to put up
with him. As between him and the brilliant Stuart there would have been
no hesitation had the choice been merely one of men; but it was
believed that the return of the Stuarts meant the return of something
like absolute government, of taxation without sanction of law, and of
religious persecution. Under the Hanoverian George the English people
had begun to exercise a considerable measure of self-government. Sharp
opposition in Parliament compelled him time and again to yield; and
when he was in Hanover the English were left to work out the problem of
free government.

Hence, although Prince Charles Edward fascinated all who met him, and
although a small army was raised for his support, still the unromantic,
common-sense Englishmen felt that things were better than in the days
gone by, and most of them refused to take up arms for the cause which
sentimentally they favored. Therefore, although the Chevalier stirred
all England and sent a thrill through the officers of state in London,
his soldiers gradually deserted, and the Scots insisted on returning to
their own country. Although the Stuart troops reached a point as far
south as Derby, they were soon pushed backward into Scotland, pursued
by an army of about nine thousand men under the Duke of Cumberland, son
of George II.

Cumberland was no soldier; he had been soundly beaten by the French on
the famous field of Fontenoy. Yet he had firmness and a sort of
overmastering brutality, which, with disciplined troops and abundant
artillery, were sufficient to win a victory over the untrained
Highlanders.

When the battle came five thousand of these mountaineers went roaring
along the English lines, with the Chevalier himself at their head. For
a moment there was surprise. The Duke of Cumberland had been drinking
so heavily that he could give no verbal orders. One of his officers,
however, is said to have come to him in his tent, where he was trying
to play cards.

"What disposition shall we make of the prisoners?" asked the officer.

The duke tried to reply, but his utterance was very thick.

"No quarter!" he was believed to say.

The officer objected and begged that such an order as that should be
given in writing. The duke rolled over and seized a sheaf of
playing-cards. Pulling one out, he scrawled the necessary order, and
that was taken to the commanders in the field.

The Highlanders could not stand the cannon fire, and the English won.
Then the fury of the common soldiery broke loose upon the country.

There was a reign of fantastic and fiendish brutality. One provost of
the town was violently kicked for a mild remonstrance about the
destruction of the Episcopalian meeting-house; another was condemned to
clean out dirty stables. Men and women were whipped and tortured on
slight suspicion or to extract information. Cumberland frankly
professed his contempt and hatred of the people among whom he found
himself, but he savagely punished robberies committed by private
soldiers for their own profit.

"Mild measures will not do," he wrote to Newcastle.

When leaving the North in July, he said:

"All the good we have done is but a little blood-letting, which has
only weakened the madness, but not at all cured it; and I tremble to
fear that this vile spot may still be the ruin of this island and of
our family."

Such was the famous battle of Culloden, fought in 1746, and putting a
final end to the hopes of all the Stuarts. As to Cumberland's order for
"No quarter," if any apology can be made for such brutality, it must be
found in the fact that the Highland chiefs had on their side agreed to
spare no captured enemy.

The battle has also left a name commonly given to the nine of diamonds,
which is called "the curse of Scotland," because it is said that on
that card Cumberland wrote his bloodthirsty order.

Such, in brief, was the story of Prince Charlie's gallant attempt to
restore the kingdom of his ancestors. Even when defeated, he would not
at once leave Scotland. A French squadron appeared off the coast near
Edinburgh. It had been sent to bring him troops and a large supply of
money, but he turned his back upon it and made his way into the
Highlands on foot, closely pursued by English soldiers and Lowland
spies.

This part of his career is in reality the most romantic of all. He was
hunted closely, almost as by hounds. For weeks he had only such sleep
as he could snatch during short periods of safety, and there were times
when his pursuers came within an inch of capturing him. But never in
his life were his spirits so high.

It was a sort of life that he had never seen before, climbing the
mighty rocks, and listening to the thunder of the cataracts, among
which he often slept, with only one faithful follower to guard him. The
story of his escape is almost incredible, but he laughed and drank and
rolled upon the grass when he was free from care. He hobnobbed with the
most suspicious-looking caterans, with whom he drank the smoky brew of
the North, and lived as he might on fish and onions and bacon and wild
fowl, with an appetite such as he had never known at the luxurious
court of Versailles or St.-Germain.

After the battle of Culloden the prince would have been captured had
not a Scottish girl named Flora Macdonald met him, caused him to be
dressed in the clothes of her waiting-maid, and thus got him off to the
Isle of Skye.

There for a time it was impossible to follow him; and there the two
lived almost alone together. Such a proximity could not fail to stir
the romantic feeling of one who was both a youth and a prince. On the
other hand, no thought of love-making seems to have entered Flora's
mind. If, however, we read Campbell's narrative very closely we can see
that Prince Charles made every advance consistent with a delicate
remembrance of her sex and services.

It seems to have been his thought that if she cared for him, then the
two might well love; and he gave her every chance to show him favor.
The youth of twenty-five and the girl of twenty-four roamed together in
the long, tufted grass or lay in the sunshine and looked out over the
sea. The prince would rest his head in her lap, and she would tumble
his golden hair with her slender fingers and sometimes clip off tresses
which she preserved to give to friends of hers as love-locks. But to
the last he was either too high or too low for her, according to her
own modest thought. He was a royal prince, the heir to a throne, or
else he was a boy with whom she might play quite fancy-free. A lover he
could not be--so pure and beautiful was her thought of him.

These were perhaps the most delightful days of all his life, as they
were a beautiful memory in hers. In time he returned to France and
resumed his place amid the intrigues that surrounded that other Stuart
prince who styled himself James III., and still kept up the appearance
of a king in exile. As he watched the artifice and the plotting of
these make-believe courtiers he may well have thought of his innocent
companion of the Highland wilds.

As for Flora, she was arrested and imprisoned for five months on
English vessels of war. After her release she was married, in 1750; and
she and her husband sailed for the American colonies just before the
Revolution. In that war Macdonald became a British officer and served
against his adopted countrymen. Perhaps because of this reason Flora
returned alone to Scotland, where she died at the age of sixty-eight.

The royal prince who would have given her his easy love lived a life of
far less dignity in the years that followed his return to France. There
was no more hope of recovering the English throne. For him there were
left only the idle and licentious diversions of such a court as that in
which his father lived.

At the death of James III., even this court was disintegrated, and
Prince Charles led a roving life under the title of Earl of Albany. In
his wanderings he met Louise Marie, the daughter of a German prince,
Gustavus Adolphus of Stolberg. She was only nineteen years of age when
she first felt the fascination that he still possessed; but it was an
unhappy marriage for the girl when she discovered that her husband was
a confirmed drunkard.

Not long after, in fact, she found her life with him so utterly
intolerable that she persuaded the Pope to allow her a formal
separation. The pontiff intrusted her to her husband's brother,
Cardinal York, who placed her in a convent and presently removed her to
his own residence in Rome.

Here begins another romance. She was often visited by Vittorio Alfieri,
the great Italian poet and dramatist. Alfieri was a man of wealth. In
early years he divided his time into alternate periods during which he
either studied hard in civil and canonical law, or was a constant
attendant upon the race-course, or rushed aimlessly all over Europe
without any object except to wear out the post-horses which he used in
relays over hundreds of miles of road. His life, indeed, was eccentric
almost to insanity; but when he had met the beautiful and lonely
Countess of Albany there came over him a striking change. She
influenced him for all that was good, and he used to say that he owed
her all that was best in his dramatic works.

Sixteen years after her marriage her royal husband died, a worn-out,
bloated wreck of one who had been as a youth a model of knightliness
and manhood. During his final years he had fallen to utter destitution,
and there was either a touch of half contempt or a feeling of remote
kinship in the act of George III., who bestowed upon the prince an
annual pension of four thousand pounds. It showed most plainly that
England was now consolidated under Hanoverian rule.

When Cardinal York died, in 1807, there was no Stuart left in the male
line; and the countess was the last to bear the royal Scottish name of
Albany.

After the prince's death his widow is said to have been married to
Alfieri, and for the rest of her life she lived in Florence, though
Alfieri died nearly twenty-one years before her.

Here we have seen a part of the romance which attaches itself to the
name of Stuart--in the chivalrous young prince, leading his Highlanders
against the bayonets of the British, lolling idly among the Hebrides,
or fallen, at the last, to be a drunkard and the husband of an
unwilling consort, who in her turn loved a famous poet. But it is this
Stuart, after all, of whom we think when we hear the bagpipes skirling
"Over the Water to Charlie" or "Wha'll be King but Charlie?"




THE END









End of Project Gutenberg's Famous Affinities of History V1, by Lyndon Orr

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FAMOUS AFFINITIES OF HISTORY V1 ***

***** This file should be named 4689.txt or 4689.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/6/8/4689/

Produced by Robert Rowe, Charles Franks and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team. HTML version by Al Haines.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.

Mowgli /ˈmaʊɡli/ is a fictional character and the protagonist of Rudyard Kipling's The Jungle Book stories. He is a feral child from Pench area in Central India who originally appeared in Rudyard Kipling's short story "In the Rukh" (collected in Many Inventions, 1893) and then went on to become the most prominent and memorable character in his fantasies The Jungle Book and The Second Jungle Book (1894–1895), which also featured stories about other characters.[1]
The Mowgli stories, including In the Rukh, were first collected in chronological order in one volume as The Works of Rudyard Kipling Volume VII: The Jungle Book (1907) (Volume VIII of this series contained the non-Mowgli stories from the Jungle Books), and subsequently in All the Mowgli Stories (1933).
In the Rukh describes how Gisborne, an English forest ranger at Pench area in Central India at the time of the British Raj, discovers a young man named Mowgli, who has extraordinary skill at hunting and tracking, and asks him to join the forestry service. Later Gisborne learns the reason for Mowgli's almost superhuman talents: he was raised by a pack of wolves in the jungle.
Kipling then proceeded to write the stories of Mowgli's childhood in detail. Lost by his parents in the Indian jungle during a tiger attack, a human baby is adopted by the wolves Mother (Raksha) and Father Wolf, who call him Mowgli the Frog because of his lack of fur and his refusal to sit still. Shere Khan the tiger demands that they give him the baby but the wolves refuse. Mowgli grows up with the pack, hunting with his brother wolves. In the pack, Mowgli learned he was able to stare down any wolf, but his unique ability to remove the painful thorns from the paws of his brothers was deeply appreciated as well.
Bagheera the black panther befriends Mowgli, because both he and Mowgli have parallel childhood experiences, as Bagheera often mentions, he was "raised in the King's cages at Oodeypore" from a cub, and thus knows the ways of man. Baloo the bear, teacher of wolves, has the thankless task of educating Mowgli in The Law of the Jungle.
Shere Khan continues to regard Mowgli as fair game, but eventually Mowgli finds a weapon he can use against the tiger — fire. After driving off Shere Khan, Mowgli goes to a human village where he is adopted by Messua and her husband whose own son Nathoo was also taken by a tiger. We never find out for certain if Mowgli is the returned Nathoo, although a hint that he might be is provided in the Jungle Book story "Tiger! Tiger!" where we learn that the tiger who carried off Messua's son was lame, just as Shere Khan is lame. On the other hand, while Messua would like to believe that her son has returned, she herself realises that this is unlikely.
While herding buffalo for the village Mowgli learns that the tiger is still planning to kill him, so with the aid of two wolves, he traps Shere Khan in a ravine, where the buffalo trample him. The tiger dies and Mowgli sets to skin him. Seeing this, Buldeo, a jealous hunter goads the villagers into persecuting Mowgli and his adopted parents as sorcerers. Mowgli runs back to the jungle with Shere Khan's hide but soon learns that Buldeo and the villagers are planning to kill Messua and her husband, so he rescues them and sends elephants, water buffaloes, and other animals to trample the village and its fields to the ground.

Xiuli Hawken, 47, is the biggest shareholder in Renhe Commercial Holdings, a developer of underground shopping malls. She ranks fourth among Chinese women billionaires and fifth in the world, with an estimated personal fortune of 22 billion yuan.

Chu Lam Yiu, 40, is chairwoman of Huabao International, a fragrance and flavoring company based in Hong Kong. Chu ranks fifth in China and seventh worldwide, with an estimated personal fortune of 18 billion yuan.


Mowgli has been cited as a major influence on Edgar Rice Burroughs' character Tarzan. Mowgli was also an influence for a number of other "wild boy" characters; see Feral Children in Mythology and Fiction.
Poul Anderson and Gordon R. Dickson used the Mowgli stories as the basis for their humorous 1957 science fiction short story "Full Pack (Hokas Wild)". This is one of a series featuring a teddy bear-like race called Hokas who enjoy human literature but cannot quite grasp the distinction between fact and fiction. In this story, a group of Hokas get hold of a copy of The Jungle Book and begin to act it out, enlisting the help of a human boy to play Mowgli. The boy's mother, who is a little bemused to see teddy bears trying to act like wolves, tags along to try to keep him (and the Hokas) out of trouble. The situation is complicated by the arrival of three alien diplomats who just happen to resemble a monkey, a tiger and a snake. This story appears in the collection Hokas Pokas! (1998) (ISBN 0-671-57858-8), and is also available online: Prologue and Story

*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).

Narayana Murthy, is an Indian businessman and the co-founder of Infosys, a multinational corporation providing business consulting, technology, engineering, and outsourcing services. Murthy was born and raised in Mysore, Karnataka, studied electrical engineering at the National Institute of Engineering, University of Mysore, and M. Tech at the Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur.

Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  

The Project Gutenberg EBook of Famous Affinities of History,  Vol 1-4,
Complete, by Lyndon Orr

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Famous Affinities of History,  Vol 1-4, Complete
       The Romance of Devotion

Author: Lyndon Orr

Release Date: November, 2003 [Etext #4693]
Posting Date: December 12, 2009

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FAMOUS AFFINITIES ***




Produced by Robert Rowe, Charles Franks and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team






FAMOUS AFFINITIES OF HISTORY

THE ROMANCE OF DEVOTION

Volumes 1-4, Complete


By Lyndon Orr



Contents

     THE STORY OF ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA

     ABELARD AND HELOISE

     QUEEN ELIZABETH AND THE EARL OF LEICESTER

     MARY QUEEN OF SCOTS AND LORD BOTHWELL

     QUEEN CHRISTINA OF SWEDEN AND THE MARQUIS MONALDESCHI

     KING CHARLES II. AND NELL GWYN

     MAURICE OF SAXONY AND ADRIENNE LECOUVREUR

     THE STORY OF PRINCE CHARLES EDWARD STUART

     THE EMPRESS CATHARINE AND PRINCE POTEMKIN

     MARIE ANTOINETTE AND COUNT FERSEN

     THE STORY OF AARON BURR

     GEORGE IV. AND MRS. FITZHERBERT

     CHARLOTTE CORDAY AND ADAM LUX

     NAPOLEON AND MARIE WALEWSKA

     THE STORY OF PAULINE BONAPARTE

     THE STORY OF THE EMPRESS MARIE LOUISE AND COUNT NEIPPERG

     THE WIVES OF GENERAL HOUSTON

     LOLA MONTEZ AND KING LUDWIG OF BAVARIA

     LEON GAMBETTA AND LEONIE LEON

     LADY BLESSINGTON AND COUNT D'ORSAY

     BYRON AND THE COUNTESS GUICCIOLI

     THE STORY OF MME. DE STAEL

     THE STORY OF KARL MARX

     FERDINAND LASSALLE AND HELENE VON DONNIGES

     THE STORY OF RACHEL

     DEAN SWIFT AND THE TWO ESTHERS

     PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY AND MARY GODWIN

     THE STORY OF THE CARLYLES

     THE STORY OF THE HUGOS

     THE STORY OF GEORGE SAND

     THE MYSTERY OF CHARLES DICKENS

     HONORE DE BALZAC AND EVELINA HANSKA

     CHARLES READE AND LAURA SEYMOUR





THE STORY OF ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA


Of all love stories that are known to human history, the love story
of Antony and Cleopatra has been for nineteen centuries the most
remarkable. It has tasked the resources of the plastic and the graphic
arts. It has been made the theme of poets and of prose narrators. It has
appeared and reappeared in a thousand forms, and it appeals as much
to the imagination to-day as it did when Antony deserted his almost
victorious troops and hastened in a swift galley from Actium in pursuit
of Cleopatra.

The wonder of the story is explained by its extraordinary nature. Many
men in private life have lost fortune and fame for the love of woman.
Kings have incurred the odium of their people, and have cared nothing
for it in comparison with the joys of sense that come from the lingering
caresses and clinging kisses. Cold-blooded statesmen, such as Parnell,
have lost the leadership of their party and have gone down in history
with a clouded name because of the fascination exercised upon them by
some woman, often far from beautiful, and yet possessing the mysterious
power which makes the triumphs of statesmanship seem slight in
comparison with the swiftly flying hours of pleasure.

But in the case of Antony and Cleopatra alone do we find a man flinging
away not merely the triumphs of civic honors or the headship of a
state, but much more than these--the mastery of what was practically the
world--in answer to the promptings of a woman's will. Hence the story
of the Roman triumvir and the Egyptian queen is not like any other
story that has yet been told. The sacrifice involved in it was so
overwhelming, so instantaneous, and so complete as to set this narrative
above all others. Shakespeare's genius has touched it with the glory
of a great imagination. Dryden, using it in the finest of his plays,
expressed its nature in the title "All for Love."

The distinguished Italian historian, Signor Ferrero, the author of many
books, has tried hard to eliminate nearly all the romantic elements
from the tale, and to have us see in it not the triumph of love, but
the blindness of ambition. Under his handling it becomes almost a sordid
drama of man's pursuit of power and of woman's selfishness. Let us
review the story as it remains, even after we have taken full account
of Ferrero's criticism. Has the world for nineteen hundred years been
blinded by a show of sentiment? Has it so absolutely been misled by
those who lived and wrote in the days which followed closely on the
events that make up this extraordinary narrative?

In answering these questions we must consider, in the first place,
the scene, and, in the second place, the psychology of the two central
characters who for so long a time have been regarded as the very
embodiment of unchecked passion.

As to the scene, it must be remembered that the Egypt of those days
was not Egyptian as we understand the word, but rather Greek. Cleopatra
herself was of Greek descent. The kingdom of Egypt had been created by a
general of Alexander the Great after that splendid warrior's death.
Its capital, the most brilliant city of the Greco-Roman world, had been
founded by Alexander himself, who gave to it his name. With his
own hands he traced out the limits of the city and issued the most
peremptory orders that it should be made the metropolis of the entire
world. The orders of a king cannot give enduring greatness to a city;
but Alexander's keen eye and marvelous brain saw at once that the site
of Alexandria was such that a great commercial community planted there
would live and flourish throughout out succeeding ages. He was right;
for within a century this new capital of Egypt leaped to the forefront
among the exchanges of the world's commerce, while everything that art
could do was lavished on its embellishment.

Alexandria lay upon a projecting tongue of land so situated that the
whole trade of the Mediterranean centered there. Down the Nile there
floated to its gates the barbaric wealth of Africa. To it came the
treasures of the East, brought from afar by caravans--silks from China,
spices and pearls from India, and enormous masses of gold and silver
from lands scarcely known. In its harbor were the vessels of every
country, from Asia in the East to Spain and Gaul and even Britain in the
West.

When Cleopatra, a young girl of seventeen, succeeded to the throne of
Egypt the population of Alexandria amounted to a million souls. The
customs duties collected at the port would, in terms of modern money,
amount each year to more than thirty million dollars, even though the
imposts were not heavy. The people, who may be described as Greek at
the top and Oriental at the bottom, were boisterous and pleasure-loving,
devoted to splendid spectacles, with horse-racing, gambling, and
dissipation; yet at the same time they were an artistic people, loving
music passionately, and by no means idle, since one part of the city was
devoted to large and prosperous manufactories of linen, paper, glass,
and muslin.

To the outward eye Alexandria was extremely beautiful. Through its
entire length ran two great boulevards, shaded and diversified by
mighty trees and parterres of multicolored flowers, amid which fountains
plashed and costly marbles gleamed. One-fifth of the whole city was
known as the Royal Residence. In it were the palaces of the reigning
family, the great museum, and the famous library which the Arabs later
burned. There were parks and gardens brilliant with tropical foliage and
adorned with the masterpieces of Grecian sculpture, while sphinxes
and obelisks gave a suggestion of Oriental strangeness. As one looked
seaward his eye beheld over the blue water the snow-white rocks of the
sheltering island, Pharos, on which was reared a lighthouse four hundred
feet in height and justly numbered among the seven wonders of the world.
Altogether, Alexandria was a city of wealth, of beauty, of stirring
life, of excitement, and of pleasure. Ferrero has aptly likened it to
Paris--not so much the Paris of to-day as the Paris of forty years ago,
when the Second Empire flourished in all its splendor as the home of joy
and strange delights.

Over the country of which Alexandria was the capital Cleopatra came to
reign at seventeen. Following the odd custom which the Greek dynasty of
the Ptolemies had inherited from their Egyptian predecessors, she was
betrothed to her own brother. He, however, was a mere child of less than
twelve, and was under the control of evil counselors, who, in his name,
gained control of the capital and drove Cleopatra into exile. Until then
she had been a mere girl; but now the spirit of a woman who was wronged
blazed up in her and called out all her latent powers. Hastening to
Syria, she gathered about herself an army and led it against her foes.

But meanwhile Julius Caesar, the greatest man of ancient times, had
arrived at Alexandria backed by an army of his veterans. Against him
no resistance would avail. Then came a brief moment during which the
Egyptian king and the Egyptian queen each strove to win the favor of
the Roman imperator. The king and his advisers had many arts, and so had
Cleopatra. One thing, however, she possessed which struck the balance in
her favor, and this was a woman's fascination.

According to the story, Caesar was unwilling to receive her. There came
into his presence, as he sat in the palace, a group of slaves bearing
a long roll of matting, bound carefully and seeming to contain some
precious work of art. The slaves made signs that they were bearing a
gift to Caesar. The master of Egypt bade them unwrap the gift that he
might see it. They did so, and out of the wrapping came Cleopatra--a
radiant vision, appealing, irresistible. Next morning it became known
everywhere that Cleopatra had remained in Caesar's quarters through the
night and that her enemies were now his enemies. In desperation they
rushed upon his legions, casting aside all pretense of amity. There
ensued a fierce contest, but the revolt was quenched in blood.

This was a crucial moment in Cleopatra's life. She had sacrificed all
that a woman has to give; but she had not done so from any love of
pleasure or from wantonness. She was queen of Egypt, and she had
redeemed her kingdom and kept it by her sacrifice. One should not
condemn her too severely. In a sense, her act was one of heroism like
that of Judith in the tent of Holofernes. But beyond all question it
changed her character. It taught her the secret of her own great power.
Henceforth she was no longer a mere girl, nor a woman of the ordinary
type. Her contact with so great a mind as Caesar's quickened her
intellect. Her knowledge that, by the charms of sense, she had mastered
even him transformed her into a strange and wonderful creature. She
learned to study the weaknesses of men, to play on their emotions, to
appeal to every subtle taste and fancy. In her were blended mental power
and that illusive, indefinable gift which is called charm.

For Cleopatra was never beautiful. Signor Ferrero seems to think this
fact to be discovery of his own, but it was set down by Plutarch in a
very striking passage written less than a century after Cleopatra and
Antony died. We may quote here what the Greek historian said of her:

Her actual beauty was far from being so remarkable that none could be
compared with her, nor was it such that it would strike your fancy when
you saw her first. Yet the influence of her presence, if you lingered
near her, was irresistible. Her attractive personality, joined with the
charm of her conversation, and the individual touch that she gave to
everything she said or did, were utterly bewitching. It was delightful
merely to hear the music of her voice, with which, like an instrument of
many strings, she could pass from one language to another.

Caesar had left Cleopatra firmly seated on the throne of Egypt. For
six years she reigned with great intelligence, keeping order in her
dominions, and patronizing with discrimination both arts and letters.
But ere long the convulsions of the Roman state once more caused her
extreme anxiety. Caesar had been assassinated, and there ensued a
period of civil war. Out of it emerged two striking figures which were
absolutely contrasted in their character. One was Octavian, the adopted
son of Caesar, a man who, though still quite young and possessed of
great ability, was cunning, cold-blooded, and deceitful. The other
was Antony, a soldier by training, and with all a soldier's bluntness,
courage, and lawlessness.

The Roman world was divided for the time between these two men, Antony
receiving the government of the East, Octavian that of the West. In the
year which had preceded this division Cleopatra had wavered between the
two opposite factions at Rome. In so doing she had excited the suspicion
of Antony, and he now demanded of her an explanation.

One must have some conception of Antony himself in order to understand
the events that followed. He was essentially a soldier, of excellent
family, being related to Caesar himself. As a very young man he was
exceedingly handsome, and bad companions led him into the pursuit of
vicious pleasure. He had scarcely come of age when he found that he owed
the enormous sum of two hundred and fifty talents, equivalent to half a
million dollars in the money of to-day. But he was much more than a mere
man of pleasure, given over to drinking and to dissipation. Men might
tell of his escapades, as when he drove about the streets of Rome in a
common cab, dangling his legs out of the window while he shouted forth
drunken songs of revelry. This was not the whole of Antony. Joining the
Roman army in Syria, he showed himself to be a soldier of great personal
bravery, a clever strategist, and also humane and merciful in the hour
of victory.

Unlike most Romans, Antony wore a full beard. His forehead was large,
and his nose was of the distinctive Roman type. His look was so bold and
masculine that people likened him to Hercules. His democratic manners
endeared him to the army. He wore a plain tunic covered with a
large, coarse mantle, and carried a huge sword at his side, despising
ostentation. Even his faults and follies added to his popularity. He
would sit down at the common soldiers' mess and drink with them, telling
them stories and clapping them on the back. He spent money like water,
quickly recognizing any daring deed which his legionaries performed. In
this respect he was like Napoleon; and, like Napoleon, he had a vein of
florid eloquence which was criticized by literary men, but which went
straight to the heart of the private soldier. In a word, he was a
powerful, virile, passionate, able man, rough, as were nearly all his
countrymen, but strong and true.

It was to this general that Cleopatra was to answer, and with a firm
reliance on the charms which had subdued Antony's great commander,
Caesar, she set out in person for Cilicia, in Asia Minor, sailing up
the river Cydnus to the place where Antony was encamped with his army.
Making all allowance for the exaggeration of historians, there can be
no doubt that she appeared to him like some dreamy vision. Her barge was
gilded, and was wafted on its way by swelling sails of Tyrian purple.
The oars which smote the water were of shining silver. As she drew
near the Roman general's camp the languorous music of flutes and harps
breathed forth a strain of invitation.

Cleopatra herself lay upon a divan set upon the deck of the barge
beneath a canopy of woven gold. She was dressed to resemble Venus, while
girls about her personated nymphs and Graces. Delicate perfumes diffused
themselves from the vessel; and at last, as she drew near the shore, all
the people for miles about were gathered there, leaving Antony to sit
alone in the tribunal where he was dispensing justice.

Word was brought to him that Venus had come to feast with Bacchus.
Antony, though still suspicious of Cleopatra, sent her an invitation
to dine with him in state. With graceful tact she sent him a
counter-invitation, and he came. The magnificence of his reception
dazzled the man who had so long known only a soldier's fare, or at
most the crude entertainments which he had enjoyed in Rome. A marvelous
display of lights was made. Thousands upon thousands of candles shone
brilliantly, arranged in squares and circles; while the banquet itself
was one that symbolized the studied luxury of the East.

At this time Cleopatra was twenty-seven years of age--a period of life
which modern physiologists have called the crisis in a woman's growth.
She had never really loved before, since she had given herself to
Caesar, not because she cared for him, but to save her kingdom. She now
came into the presence of one whose manly beauty and strong passions
were matched by her own subtlety and appealing charm.

When Antony addressed her he felt himself a rustic in her presence.
Almost resentful, he betook himself to the coarse language of the camp.
Cleopatra, with marvelous adaptability, took her tone from his, and thus
in a moment put him at his ease. Ferrero, who takes a most unfavorable
view of her character and personality, nevertheless explains the secret
of her fascination:

Herself utterly cold and callous, insensitive by nature to the flame of
true devotion, Cleopatra was one of those women gifted with an unerring
instinct for all the various roads to men's affections. She could be the
shrinking, modest girl, too shy to reveal her half-unconscious emotions
of jealousy and depression and self-abandonment, or a woman carried away
by the sweep of a fiery and uncontrollable passion. She could tickle the
esthetic sensibilities of her victims by rich and gorgeous festivals,
by the fantastic adornment of her own person and her palace, or by
brilliant discussions on literature and art; she could conjure up all
their grossest instincts with the vilest obscenities of conversation,
with the free and easy jocularity of a woman of the camps.

These last words are far too strong, and they represent only Ferrero's
personal opinion; yet there is no doubt that she met every mood of
Antony's so that he became enthralled with her at once. No such woman as
this had ever cast her eyes on him before. He had a wife at home--a most
disreputable wife--so that he cared little for domestic ties. Later,
out of policy, he made another marriage with the sister of his rival,
Octavian, but this wife he never cared for. His heart and soul were
given up to Cleopatra, the woman who could be a comrade in the camp and
a fount of tenderness in their hours of dalliance, and who possessed the
keen intellect of a man joined to the arts and fascinations of a woman.

On her side she found in Antony an ardent lover, a man of vigorous
masculinity, and, moreover, a soldier whose armies might well sustain
her on the throne of Egypt. That there was calculation mingled with her
love, no one can doubt. That some calculation also entered into Antony's
affection is likewise certain. Yet this does not affect the truth that
each was wholly given to the other. Why should it have lessened her love
for him to feel that he could protect her and defend her? Why should it
have lessened his love for her to know that she was queen of the richest
country in the world--one that could supply his needs, sustain his
armies, and gild his triumphs with magnificence?

There are many instances in history of regnant queens who loved and yet
whose love was not dissociated from the policy of state. Such were Anne
of Austria, Elizabeth of England, and the unfortunate Mary Stuart. Such,
too, we cannot fail to think, was Cleopatra.

The two remained together for ten years. In this time Antony was
separated from her only during a campaign in the East. In Alexandria he
ceased to seem a Roman citizen and gave himself up wholly to the charms
of this enticing woman. Many stories are told of their good fellowship
and close intimacy. Plutarch quotes Plato as saying that there are four
kinds of flattery, but he adds that Cleopatra had a thousand. She was
the supreme mistress of the art of pleasing.

Whether Antony were serious or mirthful, she had at the instant some new
delight or some new charm to meet his wishes. At every turn she was with
him both day and night. With him she threw dice; with him she drank;
with him she hunted; and when he exercised himself in arms she was there
to admire and applaud.

At night the pair would disguise themselves as servants and wander about
the streets of Alexandria. In fact, more than once they were set upon in
the slums and treated roughly by the rabble who did not recognize them.
Cleopatra was always alluring, always tactful, often humorous, and full
of frolic.

Then came the shock of Antony's final breach with Octavian. Either
Antony or his rival must rule the world. Cleopatra's lover once more
became the Roman general, and with a great fleet proceeded to the coast
of Greece, where his enemy was encamped. Antony had raised a hundred and
twelve thousand troops and five hundred ships--a force far superior to
that commanded by Octavian. Cleopatra was there with sixty ships.

In the days that preceded the final battle much took place which still
remains obscure. It seems likely that Antony desired to become again
the Roman, while Cleopatra wished him to thrust Rome aside and return to
Egypt with her, to reign there as an independent king. To her Rome was
almost a barbarian city. In it she could not hold sway as she could
in her beautiful Alexandria, with its blue skies and velvet turf and
tropical flowers. At Rome Antony would be distracted by the cares of
state, and she would lose her lover. At Alexandria she would have him
for her very own.

The clash came when the hostile fleets met off the promontory of Actium.
At its crisis Cleopatra, prematurely concluding that the battle was
lost, of a sudden gave the signal for retreat and put out to sea with
her fleet. This was the crucial moment. Antony, mastered by his
love, forgot all else, and in a swift ship started in pursuit of her,
abandoning his fleet and army to win or lose as fortune might decide.
For him the world was nothing; the dark-browed Queen of Egypt, imperious
and yet caressing, was everything. Never was such a prize and never
were such great hopes thrown carelessly away. After waiting seven days
Antony's troops, still undefeated, finding that their commander would
not return to them, surrendered to Octavian, who thus became the master
of an empire.

Later his legions assaulted Alexandria, and there Antony was twice
defeated. At last Cleopatra saw her great mistake. She had made her
lover give up the hope of being Rome's dictator, but in so doing she had
also lost the chance of ruling with him tranquilly in Egypt. She shut
herself behind the barred doors of the royal sepulcher; and, lest she
should be molested there, she sent forth word that she had died. Her
proud spirit could not brook the thought that she might be seized and
carried as a prisoner to Rome. She was too much a queen in soul to
be led in triumph up the Sacred Way to the Capitol with golden chains
clanking on her slender wrists.

Antony, believing the report that she was dead, fell upon his sword; but
in his dying moments he was carried into the presence of the woman for
whom he had given all. With her arms about him, his spirit passed away;
and soon after she, too, met death, whether by a poisoned draught or by
the storied asp no one can say.

Cleopatra had lived the mistress of a splendid kingdom. She had
successively captivated two of the greatest men whom Rome had ever seen.
She died, like a queen, to escape disgrace. Whatever modern critics
may have to say concerning small details, this story still remains the
strangest love story of which the world has any record.





ABELARD AND HELOISE

Many a woman, amid the transports of passionate and languishing love,
has cried out in a sort of ecstasy:

"I love you as no woman ever loved a man before!"

When she says this she believes it. Her whole soul is aflame with the
ardor of emotion. It really seems to her that no one ever could have
loved so much as she.

This cry--spontaneous, untaught, sincere--has become almost one of those
conventionalities of amorous expression which belong to the vocabulary
of self-abandonment. Every woman who utters it, when torn by the almost
terrible extravagance of a great love, believes that no one before her
has ever said it, and that in her own case it is absolutely true.

Yet, how many women are really faithful to the end? Very many, indeed,
if circumstances admit of easy faithfulness. A high-souled, generous,
ardent nature will endure an infinity of disillusionment, of misfortune,
of neglect, and even of ill treatment. Even so, the flame, though it
may sink low, can be revived again to burn as brightly as before. But
in order that this may be so it is necessary that the object of such a
wonderful devotion be alive, that he be present and visible; or, if
he be absent, that there should still exist some hope of renewing the
exquisite intimacy of the past.

A man who is sincerely loved may be compelled to take long journeys
which will separate him for an indefinite time from the woman who
has given her heart to him, and she will still be constant. He may
be imprisoned, perhaps for life, yet there is always the hope of his
release or of his escape; and some women will be faithful to him and
will watch for his return. But, given a situation which absolutely bars
out hope, which sunders two souls in such a way that they can never be
united in this world, and there we have a test so terribly severe that
few even of the most loyal and intensely clinging lovers can endure it.

Not that such a situation would lead a woman to turn to any other man
than the one to whom she had given her very life; but we might expect
that at least her strong desire would cool and weaken. She might cherish
his memory among the precious souvenirs of her love life; but that she
should still pour out the same rapturous, unstinted passion as before
seems almost too much to believe. The annals of emotion record only one
such instance; and so this instance has become known to all, and has
been cherished for nearly a thousand years. It involves the story of a
woman who did love, perhaps, as no one ever loved before or since; for
she was subjected to this cruel test, and she met the test not alone
completely, but triumphantly and almost fiercely.

The story is, of course, the story of Abelard and Heloise. It has many
times been falsely told. Portions of it have been omitted, and other
portions of it have been garbled. A whole literature has grown up
around the subject. It may well be worth our while to clear away the
ambiguities and the doubtful points, and once more to tell it simply,
without bias, and with a strict adherence to what seems to be the truth
attested by authentic records.

There is one circumstance connected with the story which we must
specially note. The narrative does something more than set forth the one
quite unimpeachable instance of unconquered constancy. It shows how, in
the last analysis, that which touches the human heart has more vitality
and more enduring interest than what concerns the intellect or those
achievements of the human mind which are external to our emotional
nature.

Pierre Abelard was undoubtedly the boldest and most creative reasoner
of his time. As a wandering teacher he drew after him thousands of
enthusiastic students. He gave a strong impetus to learning. He was a
marvelous logician and an accomplished orator. Among his pupils were men
who afterward became prelates of the church and distinguished scholars.
In the Dark Age, when the dictates of reason were almost wholly
disregarded, he fought fearlessly for intellectual freedom. He was
practically the founder of the University of Paris, which in turn became
the mother of medieval and modern universities.

He was, therefore, a great and striking figure in the history of
civilization. Nevertheless he would to-day be remembered only by
scholars and students of the Middle Ages were it not for the fact that
he inspired the most enduring love that history records. If Heloise
had never loved him, and if their story had not been so tragic and so
poignant, he would be to-day only a name known to but a few. His final
resting-place, in the cemetery of Pere Lachaise, in Paris, would not
be sought out by thousands every year and kept bright with flowers, the
gift of those who have themselves both loved and suffered.

Pierre Abelard--or, more fully, Pierre Abelard de Palais--was a native
of Brittany, born in the year 1079. His father was a knight, the lord of
the manor; but Abelard cared little for the life of a petty noble; and
so he gave up his seigniorial rights to his brothers and went forth to
become, first of all a student, and then a public lecturer and teacher.

His student days ended abruptly in Paris, where he had enrolled himself
as the pupil of a distinguished philosopher, Guillaume de Champeaux; but
one day Abelard engaged in a disputation with his master. His wonderful
combination of eloquence, logic, and originality utterly routed
Champeaux, who was thus humiliated in the presence of his disciples. He
was the first of many enemies that Abelard was destined to make in his
long and stormy career. From that moment the young Breton himself set
up as a teacher of philosophy, and the brilliancy of his discourses soon
drew to him throngs of students from all over Europe.

Before proceeding with the story of Abelard it is well to reconstruct,
however slightly, a picture of the times in which he lived. It was an
age when Western Europe was but partly civilized. Pedantry and learning
of the most minute sort existed side by side with the most violent
excesses of medieval barbarism. The Church had undertaken the gigantic
task of subduing and enlightening the semi-pagan peoples of France and
Germany and England.

When we look back at that period some will unjustly censure Rome for not
controlling more completely the savagery of the medievals. More fairly
should we wonder at the great measure of success which had already
been achieved. The leaven of a true Christianity was working in the
half-pagan populations. It had not yet completely reached the nobles and
the knights, or even all the ecclesiastics who served it and who were
consecrated to its mission. Thus, amid a sort of political chaos
were seen the glaring evils of feudalism. Kings and princes and their
followers lived the lives of swine. Private blood-feuds were regarded
lightly. There was as yet no single central power. Every man carried his
life in his hand, trusting to sword and dagger for protection.

The cities were still mere hamlets clustered around great castles or
fortified cathedrals. In Paris itself the network of dark lanes,
ill lighted and unguarded, was the scene of midnight murder and
assassination. In the winter-time wolves infested the town by night.
Men-at-arms, with torches and spears, often had to march out from their
barracks to assail the snarling, yelping packs of savage animals that
hunger drove from the surrounding forests.

Paris of the twelfth century was typical of France itself, which was
harried by human wolves intent on rapine and wanton plunder. There were
great schools of theology, but the students who attended them fought and
slashed one another. If a man's life was threatened he must protect it
by his own strength or by gathering about him a band of friends. No
one was safe. No one was tolerant. Very few were free from the grosser
vices. Even in some of the religious houses the brothers would meet
at night for unseemly revels, splashing the stone floors with wine and
shrieking in a delirium of drunkenness. The rules of the Church enjoined
temperance, continence, and celibacy; but the decrees of Leo IX. and
Nicholas II. and Alexander II. and Gregory were only partially observed.

In fact, Europe was in a state of chaos--political and moral and social.
Only very slowly was order emerging from sheer anarchy. We must remember
this when we recall some facts which meet us in the story of Abelard and
Heloise.

The jealousy of Champeaux drove Abelard for a time from Paris. He taught
and lectured at several other centers of learning, always admired, and
yet at the same time denounced by many for his advocacy of reason as
against blind faith. During the years of his wandering he came to have
a wide knowledge of the world and of human nature. If we try to imagine
him as he was in his thirty-fifth year we shall find in him a remarkable
combination of attractive qualities.

It must be remembered that though, in a sense, he was an ecclesiastic,
he had not yet been ordained to the priesthood, but was rather a
canon--a person who did not belong to any religious order, though he was
supposed to live according to a definite set of religious rules and as a
member of a religious community. Abelard, however, made rather light
of his churchly associations. He was at once an accomplished man of the
world and a profound scholar. There was nothing of the recluse about
him. He mingled with his fellow men, whom he dominated by the charm of
his personality. He was eloquent, ardent, and persuasive. He could turn
a delicate compliment as skilfully as he could elaborate a syllogism.
His rich voice had in it a seductive quality which was never without its
effect.

Handsome and well formed, he possessed as much vigor of body as of mind.
Nor were his accomplishments entirely those of the scholar. He wrote
dainty verses, which he also set to music, and which he sang himself
with a rare skill. Some have called him "the first of the troubadours,"
and many who cared nothing for his skill in logic admired him for
his gifts as a musician and a poet. Altogether, he was one to attract
attention wherever he went, for none could fail to recognize his power.

It was soon after his thirty-fifth year that he returned to Paris, where
he was welcomed by thousands. With much tact he reconciled himself to
his enemies, so that his life now seemed to be full of promise and of
sunshine.

It was at this time that he became acquainted with a very beautiful
young girl named Heloise. She was only eighteen years of age, yet
already she possessed not only beauty, but many accomplishments which
were then quite rare in women, since she both wrote and spoke a number
of languages, and, like Abelard, was a lover of music and poetry.
Heloise was the illegitimate daughter of a canon of patrician blood; so
that she is said to have been a worthy representative of the noble house
of the Montmorencys--famous throughout French history for chivalry and
charm.

Up to this time we do not know precisely what sort of life Abelard
had lived in private. His enemies declared that he had squandered his
substance in vicious ways. His friends denied this, and represented
him as strict and chaste. The truth probably lies between these two
assertions. He was naturally a pleasure-loving man of the world, who may
very possibly have relieved his severer studies by occasional revelry
and light love. It is not at all likely that he was addicted to gross
passions and low practices.

But such as he was, when he first saw Heloise he conceived for her
a violent attachment. Carefully guarded in the house of her uncle,
Fulbert, it was difficult at first for Abelard to meet her save in the
most casual way; yet every time that he heard her exquisite voice and
watched her graceful manners he became more and more infatuated. His
studies suddenly seemed tame and colorless beside the fierce scarlet
flame which blazed up in his heart.

Nevertheless, it was because of these studies and of his great
reputation as a scholar that he managed to obtain access to Heloise. He
flattered her uncle and made a chance proposal that he should himself
become an inmate of Fulbert's household in order that he might teach
this girl of so much promise. Such an offer coming from so brilliant a
man was joyfully accepted.

From that time Abelard could visit Heloise without restraint. He was
her teacher, and the two spent hours together, nominally in the study of
Greek and Hebrew; but doubtless very little was said between them
upon such unattractive subjects. On the contrary, with all his wide
experience of life, his eloquence, his perfect manners, and his
fascination, Abelard put forth his power to captivate the senses of
a girl still in her teens and quite ignorant of the world. As Remusat
says, he employed to win her the genius which had overwhelmed all the
great centers of learning in the Western world.

It was then that the pleasures of knowledge, the joys of thought, the
emotions of eloquence, were all called into play to charm and move and
plunge into a profound and strange intoxication this noble and tender
heart which had never known either love or sorrow.... One can imagine
that everything helped on the inevitable end. Their studies gave them
opportunities to see each other freely, and also permitted them to be
alone together. Then their books lay open between them; but either long
periods of silence stilled their reading, or else words of deepening
intimacy made them forget their studies altogether. The eyes of the two
lovers turned from the book to mingle their glances, and then to turn
away in a confusion that was conscious.

Hand would touch hand, apparently by accident; and when conversation
ceased, Abelard would often hear the long, quivering sigh which showed
the strange, half-frightened, and yet exquisite joy which Heloise
experienced.

It was not long before the girl's heart had been wholly won. Transported
by her emotion, she met the caresses of her lover with those as
unrestrained as his. Her very innocence deprived her of the protection
which older women would have had. All was given freely, and even
wildly, by Heloise; and all was taken by Abelard, who afterward himself
declared:

"The pleasure of teaching her to love surpassed the delightful fragrance
of all the perfumes in the world."

Yet these two could not always live in a paradise which was entirely
their own. The world of Paris took notice of their close association.
Some poems written to Heloise by Abelard, as if in letters of fire, were
found and shown to Fulbert, who, until this time, had suspected nothing.
Angrily he ordered Abelard to leave his house. He forbade his niece to
see her lover any more.

But the two could not be separated; and, indeed, there was good reason
why they should still cling together. Secretly Heloise left her uncle's
house and fled through the narrow lanes of Paris to the dwelling of
Abelard's sister, Denyse, where Abelard himself was living. There,
presently, the young girl gave birth to a son, who was named Astrolabe,
after an instrument used by astronomers, since both the father and
the mother felt that the offspring of so great a love should have no
ordinary name.

Fulbert was furious, and rightly so. His hospitality had been outraged
and his niece dishonored. He insisted that the pair should at once
be married. Here was revealed a certain weakness in the character of
Abelard. He consented to the marriage, but insisted that it should be
kept an utter secret.

Oddly enough, it was Heloise herself who objected to becoming the wife
of the man she loved. Unselfishness could go no farther. She saw that,
were he to marry her, his advancement in the Church would be almost
impossible; for, while the very minor clergy sometimes married in spite
of the papal bulls, matrimony was becoming a fatal bar to ecclesiastical
promotion. And so Heloise pleaded pitifully, both with her uncle and
with Abelard, that there should be no marriage. She would rather bear
all manner of disgrace than stand in the way of Abelard's advancement.

He has himself given some of the words in which she pleaded with him:

What glory shall I win from you, when I have made you quite inglorious
and have humbled both of us? What vengeance will the world inflict on
me if I deprive it of one so brilliant? What curses will follow such a
marriage? How outrageous would it be that you, whom nature created for
the universal good, should be devoted to one woman and plunged into such
disgrace? I loathe the thought of a marriage which would humiliate you.

Indeed, every possible effort which another woman in her place would
employ to make him marry her she used in order to dissuade him. Finally,
her sweet face streaming with tears, she uttered that tremendous
sentence which makes one really think that she loved him as no other
woman ever loved a man. She cried out, in an agony of self-sacrifice:

"I would rather be your mistress than the wife even of an emperor!"

Nevertheless, the two were married, and Abelard returned to his
lecture-room and to his studies. For months they met but seldom.
Meanwhile, however, the taunts and innuendos directed against Heloise
so irritated Fulbert that he broke his promise of secrecy, and told his
friends that Abelard and Heloise were man and wife. They went to Heloise
for confirmation. Once more she showed in an extraordinary way the depth
of her devotion.

"I am no wife," she said. "It is not true that Abelard has married me.
My uncle merely tells you this to save my reputation."

They asked her whether she would swear to this; and, without a moment's
hesitation, this pure and noble woman took an oath upon the Scriptures
that there had been no marriage.

Fulbert was enraged by this. He ill-treated Heloise, and, furthermore,
he forbade Abelard to visit her. The girl, therefore, again left her
uncle's house and betook herself to a convent just outside of Paris,
where she assumed the habit of a nun as a disguise. There Abelard
continued from time to time to meet her.

When Fulbert heard of this he put his own interpretation on it. He
believed that Abelard intended to ignore the marriage altogether, and
that possibly he might even marry some other woman. In any case, he now
hated Abelard with all his heart; and he resolved to take a fearful and
unnatural vengeance which would at once prevent his enemy from making
any other marriage, while at the same time it would debar him from
ecclesiastical preferment.

To carry out his plot Fulbert first bribed a man who was the
body-servant of Abelard, watching at the door of his room each night.
Then he hired the services of four ruffians. After Abelard had retired
and was deep in slumber the treacherous valet unbarred the door. The
hirelings of Fulbert entered and fell upon the sleeping man. Three of
them bound him fast, while the fourth, with a razor, inflicted on him
the most shameful mutilation that is possible. Then, extinguishing
the lights, the wretches slunk away and were lost in darkness, leaving
behind their victim bound to his couch, uttering cries of torment and
bathed in his own blood.

It is a shocking story, and yet it is intensely characteristic of the
lawless and barbarous era in which it happened. Early the next morning
the news flew rapidly through Paris. The city hummed like a bee-hive.
Citizens and students and ecclesiastics poured into the street and
surrounded the house of Abelard.

"Almost the entire city," says Fulques, as quoted by McCabe, "went
clamoring toward his house. Women wept as if each one had lost her
husband."

Unmanned though he was, Abelard still retained enough of the spirit of
his time to seek vengeance. He, in his turn, employed ruffians whom he
set upon the track of those who had assaulted him. The treacherous valet
and one of Fulbert's hirelings were run down, seized, and mutilated
precisely as Abelard had been; and their eyes were blinded. A third was
lodged in prison. Fulbert himself was accused before one of the Church
courts, which alone had power to punish an ecclesiastic, and all his
goods were confiscated.

But, meantime, how did it fare with Heloise? Her grief was greater than
his own, while her love and her devotion were absolutely undiminished.
But Abelard now showed a selfishness--and indeed, a meanness--far beyond
any that he had before exhibited. Heloise could no more be his wife.
He made it plain that he put no trust in her fidelity. He was unwilling
that she should live in the world while he could not; and so he told
her sternly that she must take the veil and bury herself for ever in a
nunnery.

The pain and shame which she experienced at this came wholly from the
fact that evidently Abelard did not trust her. Long afterward she wrote:

God knows I should not have hesitated, at your command, to precede or to
follow you to hell itself!

It was his distrust that cut her to the heart. Still, her love for him
was so intense that she obeyed his order. Soon after she took the vows;
and in the convent chapel, shaken with sobs, she knelt before the altar
and assumed the veil of a cloistered nun. Abelard himself put on the
black tunic of a Benedictine monk and entered the Abbey of St. Denis.

It is unnecessary here to follow out all the details of the lives of
Abelard and Heloise after this heart-rendering scene. Abelard
passed through many years of strife and disappointment, and even of
humiliation; for on one occasion, just as he had silenced Guillaume
de Champeaux, so he himself was silenced and put to rout by Bernard of
Clairvaux--"a frail, tense, absorbed, dominant little man, whose face
was white and worn with suffering," but in whose eyes there was a
light of supreme strength. Bernard represented pure faith, as Abelard
represented pure reason; and the two men met before a great council to
match their respective powers.

Bernard, with fiery eloquence, brought a charge of heresy against
Abelard in an oration which was like a charge of cavalry. When he had
concluded Abelard rose with an ashen face, stammered out a few words,
and sat down. He was condemned by the council, and his works were
ordered to be burned.

All his later life was one of misfortune, of humiliation, and even of
personal danger. The reckless monks whom he tried to rule rose fiercely
against him. His life was threatened. He betook himself to a desolate
and lonely place, where he built for himself a hut of reeds and rushes,
hoping to spend his final years in meditation. But there were many who
had not forgotten his ability as a teacher. These flocked by hundreds
to the desert place where he abode. His hut was surrounded by tents and
rude hovels, built by his scholars for their shelter.

Thus Abelard resumed his teaching, though in a very different frame of
mind. In time he built a structure of wood and stone, which he called
the Paraclete, some remains of which can still be seen.

All this time no word had passed between him and Heloise. But presently
Abelard wrote and gave to the world a curious and exceedingly frank
book, which he called The Story of My Misfortunes. A copy of it reached
the hands of Heloise, and she at once sent to Abelard the first of a
series of letters which have remained unique in the literature of love.

Ten years had passed, and yet the woman's heart was as faithful and as
full of yearning as on the day when the two had parted. It has been
said that the letters are not genuine, and they must be read with this
assertion in mind; yet it is difficult to believe that any one save
Heloise herself could have flung a human soul into such frankly
passionate utterances, or that any imitator could have done the work.

In her first letter, which was sent to Abelard written upon parchment,
she said:

At thy command I would change, not merely my costume, but my very soul,
so entirely art thou the sole possessor of my body and my spirit. Never,
God is my witness, never have I sought anything in thee but thyself;
I have sought thee, and not thy gifts. I have not looked to the
marriage-bond or dowry.

She begged him to write to her, and to lead her to God, as once he had
led her into the mysteries of pleasure. Abelard answered in a letter,
friendly to be sure, but formal--the letter of a priest to a cloistered
nun. The opening words of it are characteristic of the whole:

To Heloise, his sister in Christ, from Abelard, her brother in Him.

The letter was a long one, but throughout the whole of it the writer's
tone was cold and prudent. Its very coldness roused her soul to a
passionate revolt. Her second letter bursts forth in a sort of anguish:

How hast thou been able to frame such thoughts, dearest? How hast thou
found words to convey them? Oh, if I dared but call God cruel to me!
Oh, most wretched of all creatures that I am! So sweet did I find the
pleasures of our loving days that I cannot bring myself to reject
them or to banish them from my memory. Wheresoever I go, they thrust
themselves upon my vision, and rekindle the old desire.

But Abelard knew only too well that not in this life could there be
anything save spiritual love between himself and Heloise. He wrote to
her again and again, always in the same remote and unimpassioned way.
He tells her about the history of monasticism, and discusses with her
matters of theology and ethics; but he never writes one word to feed
the flame that is consuming her. The woman understood at last; and by
degrees her letters became as calm as his--suffused, however, with a
tenderness and feeling which showed that in her heart of hearts she was
still entirely given to him.

After some years Abelard left his dwelling at the Paraclete, and there
was founded there a religious house of which Heloise became the abbess.
All the world respected her for her sweetness, her wisdom, and the
purity of her character. She made friends as easily as Abelard made
enemies. Even Bernard, who had overthrown her husband, sought out
Heloise to ask for her advice and counsel.

Abelard died while on his way to Rome, whither he was journeying
in order to undergo a penalty; and his body was brought back to the
Paraclete, where it was entombed. Over it for twenty-two years Heloise
watched with tender care; and when she died, her body was laid beside
that of her lover.

To-day their bones are mingled as she would have desired them to be
mingled. The stones of their tomb in the great cemetery of Pere Lachaise
were brought from the ruins of the Paraclete, and above the sarcophagus
are two recumbent figures, the whole being the work of the artist
Alexandra Lenoir, who died in 1836. The figure representing Heloise
is not, however, an authentic likeness. The model for it was a lady
belonging to a noble family of France, and the figure itself was brought
to Pere Lachaise from the ancient College de Beauvais.

The letters of Heloise have been read and imitated throughout the whole
of the last nine centuries. Some have found in them the utterances of
a woman whose love of love was greater than her love of God and whose
intensity of passion nothing could subdue; and so these have condemned
her. But others, like Chateaubriand, have more truly seen in them a pure
and noble spirit to whom fate had been very cruel; and who was, after
all, writing to the man who had been her lawful husband.

Some of the most famous imitations of her letters are those in the
ancient poem entitled, "The Romance of the Rose," written by Jean de
Meung, in the thirteenth century; and in modern times her first letter
was paraphrased by Alexander Pope, and in French by Colardeau. There
exist in English half a dozen translations of them, with Abelard's
replies. It is interesting to remember that practically all the other
writings of Abelard remained unpublished and unedited until a very
recent period. He was a remarkable figure as a philosopher and scholar;
but the world cares for him only because he was loved by Heloise.





QUEEN ELIZABETH AND THE EARL OF LEICESTER


History has many romantic stories to tell of the part which women
have played in determining the destinies of nations. Sometimes it is
a woman's beauty that causes the shifting of a province. Again it is
another woman's rich possessions that incite invasion and lead to bloody
wars. Marriages or dowries, or the refusal of marriages and the lack
of dowries, inheritance through an heiress, the failure of a male
succession--in these and in many other ways women have set their mark
indelibly upon the trend of history.

However, if we look over these different events we shall find that it
is not so much the mere longing for a woman--the desire to have her as a
queen--that has seriously affected the annals of any nation. Kings, like
ordinary men, have paid their suit and then have ridden away repulsed,
yet not seriously dejected. Most royal marriages are made either to
secure the succession to a throne by a legitimate line of heirs or else
to unite adjoining states and make a powerful kingdom out of two that
are less powerful. But, as a rule, kings have found greater delight in
some sheltered bower remote from courts than in the castled halls and
well-cared-for nooks where their own wives and children have been reared
with all the appurtenances of legitimacy.

There are not many stories that hang persistently about the love-making
of a single woman. In the case of one or another we may find an episode
or two--something dashing, something spirited or striking, something
brilliant and exhilarating, or something sad. But for a woman's whole
life to be spent in courtship that meant nothing and that was only a
clever aid to diplomacy--this is surely an unusual and really wonderful
thing.

It is the more unusual because the woman herself was not intended by
nature to be wasted upon the cold and cheerless sport of chancellors
and counselors and men who had no thought of her except to use her as
a pawn. She was hot-blooded, descended from a fiery race, and one whose
temper was quick to leap into the passion of a man.

In studying this phase of the long and interesting life of Elizabeth of
England we must notice several important facts. In the first place,
she gave herself, above all else, to the maintenance of England--not an
England that would be half Spanish or half French, or even partly Dutch
and Flemish, but the Merry England of tradition--the England that was
one and undivided, with its growing freedom of thought, its bows and
bills, its nut-brown ale, its sturdy yeomen, and its loyalty to crown
and Parliament. She once said, almost as in an agony:

"I love England more than anything!"

And one may really hold that this was true.

For England she schemed and planned. For England she gave up many of her
royal rights. For England she descended into depths of treachery. For
England she left herself on record as an arrant liar, false, perjured,
yet successful; and because of her success for England's sake her
countrymen will hold her in high remembrance, since her scheming and her
falsehood are the offenses that one pardons most readily in a woman.

In the second place, it must be remembered that Elizabeth's courtships
and pretended love-makings were almost always a part of her diplomacy.
When not a part of her diplomacy they were a mere appendage to her
vanity. To seem to be the flower of the English people, and to be
surrounded by the noblest, the bravest, and the most handsome cavaliers,
not only of her own kingdom, but of others--this was, indeed, a choice
morsel of which she was fond of tasting, even though it meant nothing
beyond the moment.

Finally, though at times she could be very cold, and though she made
herself still colder in order that she might play fast and loose with
foreign suitors who played fast and loose with her--the King of
Spain, the Duc d'Alencon, brother of the French king, with an Austrian
archduke, with a magnificent barbarian prince of Muscovy, with Eric of
Sweden, or any other Scandinavian suitor--she felt a woman's need for
some nearer and more tender association to which she might give freer
play and in which she might feel those deeper emotions without the
danger that arises when love is mingled with diplomacy.

Let us first consider a picture of the woman as she really was in order
that we may understand her triple nature--consummate mistress of every
art that statesmen know, and using at every moment her person as a lure;
a vain-glorious queen who seemed to be the prey of boundless vanity;
and, lastly, a woman who had all a woman's passion, and who could cast
suddenly aside the check and balance which restrained her before the
public gaze and could allow herself to give full play to the emotion
that she inherited from the king, her father, who was himself a marvel
of fire and impetuosity. That the daughter of Henry VIII. and Anne
Boleyn should be a gentle, timid maiden would be to make heredity a
farce.

Elizabeth was about twenty-five years of age when she ascended the
throne of England. It is odd that the date of her birth cannot be given
with precision. The intrigues and disturbances of the English court,
and the fact that she was a princess, made her birth a matter of less
account than if there had been no male heir to the throne. At any rate,
when she ascended it, after the deaths of her brother, King Edward
VI., and her sister, Queen Mary, she was a woman well trained both in
intellect and in physical development.

Mr. Martin Hume, who loves to dwell upon the later years of Queen
Elizabeth, speaks rather bitterly of her as a "painted old harridan";
and such she may well have seemed when, at nearly seventy years of age,
she leered and grinned a sort of skeleton smile at the handsome young
courtiers who pretended to see in her the queen of beauty and to be
dying for love of her.

Yet, in her earlier years, when she was young and strong and impetuous,
she deserved far different words than these. The portrait of her by
Zucchero, which now hangs in Hampton Court, depicts her when she must
have been of more than middle age; and still the face is one of beauty,
though it be a strange and almost artificial beauty--one that draws,
attracts, and, perhaps, lures you on against your will.

It is interesting to compare this painting with the frank word-picture
of a certain German agent who was sent to England by his emperor, and
who seems to have been greatly fascinated by Queen Elizabeth. She was at
that time in the prime of her beauty and her power. Her complexion was
of that peculiar transparency which is seen only in the face of golden
blondes. Her figure was fine and graceful, and her wit an accomplishment
that would have made a woman of any rank or time remarkable. The German
envoy says:

She lives a life of such magnificence and feasting as can hardly be
imagined, and occupies a great portion of her time with balls, banquets,
hunting, and similar amusements, with the utmost possible display, but
nevertheless she insists upon far greater respect being shown her than
was exacted by Queen Mary. She summons Parliament, but lets them know
that her orders must be obeyed in any case.

If any one will look at the painting by Zucchero he will see how much is
made of Elizabeth's hands--a distinctive feature quite as noble with the
Tudors as is the "Hapsburg lip" among the descendants of the house of
Austria. These were ungloved, and were very long and white, and she
looked at them and played with them a great deal; and, indeed,
they justified the admiration with which they were regarded by her
flatterers.

Such was the personal appearance of Elizabeth. When a young girl, we
have still more favorable opinions of her that were written by those who
had occasion to be near her. Not only do they record swift glimpses of
her person, but sometimes in a word or two they give an insight into
certain traits of mind which came out prominently in her later years.

It may, perhaps, be well to view her as a woman before we regard her
more fully as a queen. It has been said that Elizabeth inherited many
of the traits of her father--the boldness of spirit, the rapidity of
decision, and, at the same time, the fox-like craft which often showed
itself when it was least expected.

Henry had also, as is well known, a love of the other sex, which has
made his reign memorable. And yet it must be noted that while he loved
much, it was not loose love. Many a king of England, from Henry II. to
Charles II., has offended far more than Henry VIII. Where Henry loved,
he married; and it was the unfortunate result of these royal marriages
that has made him seem unduly fond of women. If, however, we examine
each one of the separate espousals we shall find that he did not enter
into it lightly, and that he broke it off unwillingly. His ardent
temperament, therefore, was checked by a certain rational or
conventional propriety, so that he was by no means a loose liver, as
many would make him out to be.

We must remember this when we recall the charges that have been made
against Elizabeth, and the strange stories that were told of her
tricks--by no means seemly tricks--which she used to play with her
guardian, Lord Thomas Seymour. The antics she performed with him in her
dressing-room were made the subject of an official inquiry; yet it came
out that while Elizabeth was less than sixteen, and Lord Thomas was very
much her senior, his wife was with him on his visits to the chamber of
the princess.

Sir Robert Tyrwhitt and his wife were also sent to question her,
Tyrwhitt had a keen mind and one well trained to cope with any other's
wit in this sort of cross-examination. Elizabeth was only a girl of
fifteen, yet she was a match for the accomplished courtier in diplomacy
and quick retort. He was sent down to worm out of her everything that
she knew. Threats and flattery and forged letters and false confessions
were tried on her; but they were tried in vain. She would tell nothing
of importance. She denied everything. She sulked, she cried, she availed
herself of a woman's favorite defense in suddenly attacking those who
had attacked her. She brought counter charges against Tyrwhitt, and put
her enemies on their own defense. Not a compromising word could they
wring out of her.

She bitterly complained of the imprisonment of her governess, Mrs.
Ashley, and cried out:

"I have not so behaved that you need put more mistresses upon me!"

Altogether, she was too much for Sir Robert, and he was wise enough to
recognize her cleverness.

"She hath a very good wit," said he, shrewdly; "and nothing is to be
gotten of her except by great policy." And he added: "If I had to say
my fancy, I think it more meet that she should have two governesses than
one."

Mr. Hume notes the fact that after the two servants of the princess had
been examined and had told nothing very serious they found that they
had been wise in remaining friends of the royal girl. No sooner had
Elizabeth become queen than she knighted the man Parry and made him
treasurer of the household, while Mrs. Ashley, the governess, was
treated with great consideration. Thus, very naturally, Mr. Hume says:
"They had probably kept back far more than they told."

Even Tyrwhitt believed that there was a secret compact between them, for
he said, quaintly: "They all sing one song, and she hath set the note
for them."

Soon after this her brother Edward's death brought to the throne her
elder sister, Mary, who has harshly become known as Bloody Mary. During
this time Elizabeth put aside her boldness, and became apparently a shy
and simple-minded virgin. Surrounded on every side by those who sought
to trap her, there was nothing in her bearing to make her seem the head
of a party or the young chief of a faction. Nothing could exceed her in
meekness. She spoke of her sister in the humblest terms. She exhibited
no signs of the Tudor animation that was in reality so strong a part of
her character.

But, coming to the throne, she threw away her modesty and brawled and
rioted with very little self-restraint. The people as a whole found
little fault with her. She reminded them of her father, the bluff King
Hal; and even those who criticized her did so only partially. They
thought much better of her than they had of her saturnine sister, the
first Queen Mary.

The life of Elizabeth has been very oddly misunderstood, not so much for
the facts in it as for the manner in which these have been arranged and
the relation which they have to one another. We ought to recollect that
this woman did not live in a restricted sphere, that her life was not
a short one, and that it was crowded with incidents and full of vivid
color. Some think of her as living for a short period of time and speak
of the great historical characters who surrounded her as belonging to a
single epoch. To them she has one set of suitors all the time--the Duc
d'Alencon, the King of Denmark's brother, the Prince of Sweden, the
russian potentate, the archduke sending her sweet messages from
Austria, the melancholy King of Spain, together with a number of her
own brilliant Englishmen--Sir William Pickering, Sir Robert Dudley, Lord
Darnley, the Earl of Essex, Sir Philip Sidney, and Sir Walter Raleigh.

Of course, as a matter of fact, Elizabeth lived for nearly seventy
years--almost three-quarters of a century--and in that long time there
came and went both men and women, those whom she had used and cast
aside, with others whom she had also treated with gratitude, and who had
died gladly serving her. But through it all there was a continual change
in her environment, though not in her. The young soldier went to the
battle-field and died; the wise counselor gave her his advice, and
she either took it or cared nothing for it. She herself was a curious
blending of forwardness and folly, of wisdom and wantonness, of
frivolity and unbridled fancy. But through it all she loved her people,
even though she often cheated them and made them pay her taxes in the
harsh old way that prevailed before there was any right save the king's
will.

At the same time, this was only by fits and starts, and on the whole
she served them well. Therefore, to most of them she was always the good
Queen Bess. What mattered it to the ditcher and yeoman, far from the
court, that the queen was said to dance in her nightdress and to swear
like a trooper?

It was, indeed, largely from these rustic sources that such stories were
scattered throughout England. Peasants thought them picturesque. More
to the point with them were peace and prosperity throughout the country,
the fact that law was administered with honesty and justice, and that
England was safe from her deadly enemies--the swarthy Spaniards and the
scheming French.

But, as I said, we must remember always that the Elizabeth of one period
was not the Elizabeth of another, and that the England of one period
was not the England of another. As one thinks of it, there is something
wonderful in the almost star-like way in which this girl flitted
unharmed through a thousand perils. Her own countrymen were at first
divided against her; a score of greedy, avaricious suitors sought her
destruction, or at least her hand to lead her to destruction; all the
great powers of the Continent were either demanding an alliance with
England or threatening to dash England down amid their own dissensions.

What had this girl to play off against such dangers? Only an undaunted
spirit, a scheming mind that knew no scruples, and finally her own
person and the fact that she was a woman, and, therefore, might give
herself in marriage and become the mother of a race of kings.

It was this last weapon, the weapon of her sex, that proved, perhaps,
the most powerful of all. By promising a marriage or by denying it, or
by neither promising nor denying but withholding it, she gave forth a
thousand wily intimations which kept those who surrounded her at bay
until she had made still another deft and skilful combination, escaping
like some startled creature to a new place of safety.

In 1583, when she was fifty years of age, she had reached a point when
her courtships and her pretended love-making were no longer necessary.
She had played Sweden against Denmark, and France against Spain, and the
Austrian archduke against the others, and many suitors in her own land
against the different factions which they headed. She might have sat
herself down to rest; for she could feel that her wisdom had led her
up into a high place, whence she might look down in peace and with
assurance of the tranquillity that she had won. Not yet had the great
Armada rolled and thundered toward the English shores. But she was
certain that her land was secure, compact, and safe.

It remains to see what were those amatory relations which she may be
said to have sincerely held. She had played at love-making with foreign
princes, because it was wise and, for the moment, best. She had played
with Englishmen of rank who aspired to her hand, because in that way she
might conciliate, at one time her Catholic and at another her Protestant
subjects. But what of the real and inward feeling of her heart, when she
was not thinking of political problems or the necessities of state!

This is an interesting question. One may at least seek the answer,
hoping thereby to solve one of the most interesting phases of this
perplexing and most remarkable woman.

It must be remembered that it was not a question of whether Elizabeth
desired marriage. She may have done so as involving a brilliant stroke
of policy. In this sense she may have wished to marry one of the two
French princes who were among her suitors. But even here she hesitated,
and her Parliament disapproved; for by this time England had become
largely Protestant. Again, had she married a French prince and had
children, England might have become an appanage of France.

There is no particular evidence that she had any feeling at all for her
Flemish, Austrian, or Russian suitors, while the Swede's pretensions
were the laughing-stock of the English court. So we may set aside this
question of marriage as having nothing to do with her emotional life.
She did desire a son, as was shown by her passionate outcry when she
compared herself with Mary of Scotland.

"The Queen of Scots has a bonny son, while I am but a barren stock!"

She was too wise to wed a subject; though, had she married at all, her
choice would doubtless have been an Englishman. In this respect, as in
so many others, she was like her father, who chose his numerous wives,
with the exception of the first, from among the English ladies of
the court; just as the showy Edward IV. was happy in marrying "Dame
Elizabeth Woodville." But what a king may do is by no means so easy for
a queen; and a husband is almost certain to assume an authority which
makes him unpopular with the subjects of his wife.

Hence, as said above, we must consider not so much whom she would have
liked to marry, but rather to whom her love went out spontaneously, and
not as a part of that amatory play which amused her from the time when
she frisked with Seymour down to the very last days, when she could no
longer move about, but when she still dabbled her cheeks with rouge and
powder and set her skeleton face amid a forest of ruffs.

There were many whom she cared for after a fashion. She would not let
Sir Walter Raleigh visit her American colonies, because she could not
bear to have him so long away from her. She had great moments of passion
for the Earl of Essex, though in the end she signed his death-warrant
because he was as dominant in spirit as the queen herself.

Readers of Sir Walter Scott's wonderfully picturesque novel, Kenilworth,
will note how he throws the strongest light upon Elizabeth's affection
for Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester. Scott's historical instinct is
united here with a vein of psychology which goes deeper than is usual
with him. We see Elizabeth trying hard to share her favor equally
between two nobles; but the Earl of Essex fails to please her because he
lacked those exquisite manners which made Leicester so great a favorite
with the fastidious queen.

Then, too, the story of Leicester's marriage with Amy Robsart is
something more than a myth, based upon an obscure legend and an ancient
ballad. The earl had had such a wife, and there were sinister stories
about the manner of her death. But it is Scott who invents the
villainous Varney and the bulldog Anthony Foster; just as he brought
the whole episode into the foreground and made it occur at a period much
later than was historically true. Still, Scott felt--and he was imbued
with the spirit and knowledge of that time--a strong conviction that
Elizabeth loved Leicester as she really loved no one else.

There is one interesting fact which goes far to convince us. Just as
her father was, in a way, polygamous, so Elizabeth was even more truly
polyandrous. It was inevitable that she should surround herself with
attractive men, whose love-locks she would caress and whose flatteries
she would greedily accept. To the outward eye there was very little
difference in her treatment of the handsome and daring nobles of her
court; yet a historian of her time makes one very shrewd remark when
he says: "To every one she gave some power at times--to all save
Leicester."

Cecil and Walsingham in counsel and Essex and Raleigh in the field might
have their own way at times, and even share the sovereign's power, but
to Leicester she intrusted no high commands and no important mission.
Why so? Simply because she loved him more than any of the rest; and,
knowing this, she knew that if besides her love she granted him any
measure of control or power, then she would be but half a queen and
would be led either to marry him or else to let him sway her as he
would.

For the reason given, one may say with confidence that, while
Elizabeth's light loves were fleeting, she gave a deep affection to
this handsome, bold, and brilliant Englishman and cherished him in a far
different way from any of the others. This was as near as she ever came
to marriage, and it was this love at least which makes Shakespeare's
famous line as false as it is beautiful, when he describes "the imperial
votaress" as passing by "in maiden meditation, fancy free."





MARY QUEEN OF SCOTS AND LORD BOTHWELL


Mary Stuart and Cleopatra are the two women who have most attracted the
fancy of poets, dramatists, novelists, and painters, from their own time
down to the present day.

In some respects there is a certain likeness in their careers. Each
was queen of a nation whose affairs were entangled with those of a much
greater one. Each sought for her own ideal of love until she found it.
Each won that love recklessly, almost madly. Each, in its attainment,
fell from power and fortune. Each died before her natural life was
ended. One caused the man she loved to cast away the sovereignty of
a mighty state. The other lost her own crown in order that she might
achieve the whole desire of her heart.

There is still another parallel which may be found. Each of these women
was reputed to be exquisitely beautiful; yet each fell short of beauty's
highest standards. They are alike remembered in song and story because
of qualities that are far more powerful than any physical charm can be.
They impressed the imagination of their own contemporaries just as they
had impressed the imagination of all succeeding ages, by reason of a
strange and irresistible fascination which no one could explain, but
which very few could experience and resist.

Mary Stuart was born six days before her father's death, and when the
kingdom which was her heritage seemed to be almost in its death-throes.
James V. of Scotland, half Stuart and half Tudor, was no ordinary
monarch. As a mere boy he had burst the bonds with which a regency had
bound him, and he had ruled the wild Scotland of the sixteenth century.
He was brave and crafty, keen in statesmanship, and dissolute in
pleasure.

His first wife had given him no heirs; so at her death he sought out
a princess whom he pursued all the more ardently because she was also
courted by the burly Henry VIII. of England. This girl was Marie of
Lorraine, daughter of the Duc de Guise. She was fit to be the mother of
a lion's brood, for she was above six feet in height and of proportions
so ample as to excite the admiration of the royal voluptuary who sat
upon the throne of England.

"I am big," said he, "and I want a wife who is as big as I am."

But James of Scotland wooed in person, and not by embassies, and he
triumphantly carried off his strapping princess. Henry of England gnawed
his beard in vain; and, though in time he found consolation in another
woman's arms, he viewed James not only as a public but as a private
enemy.

There was war between the two countries. First the Scots repelled an
English army; but soon they were themselves disgracefully defeated at
Solway Moss by a force much their inferior in numbers. The shame of it
broke King James's heart. As he was galloping from the battle-field the
news was brought him that his wife had given birth to a daughter.
He took little notice of the message; and in a few days he had died,
moaning with his last breath the mysterious words:

"It came with a lass--with a lass it will go!"

The child who was born at this ill-omened crisis was Mary Stuart, who
within a week became, in her own right, Queen of Scotland. Her mother
acted as regent of the kingdom. Henry of England demanded that the
infant girl should be betrothed to his young son, Prince Edward, who
afterward reigned as Edward VI., though he died while still a boy. The
proposal was rejected, and the war between England and Scotland went on
its bloody course; but meanwhile the little queen was sent to France,
her mother's home, so that she might be trained in accomplishments which
were rare in Scotland.

In France she grew up at the court of Catherine de' Medici, that
imperious intriguer whose splendid surroundings were tainted with the
corruption which she had brought from her native Italy. It was, indeed,
a singular training-school for a girl of Mary Stuart's character. She
saw about her a superficial chivalry and a most profound depravity.
Poets like Ronsard graced the life of the court with exquisite verse.
Troubadours and minstrels sang sweet music there. There were fetes and
tournaments and gallantry of bearing; yet, on the other hand, there was
every possible refinement and variety of vice. Men were slain before
the eyes of the queen herself. The talk of the court was of intrigue and
lust and evil things which often verged on crime. Catherine de' Medici
herself kept her nominal husband at arm's-length; and in order to
maintain her grasp on France she connived at the corruption of her own
children, three of whom were destined in their turn to sit upon the
throne.

Mary Stuart grew up in these surroundings until she was sixteen, eating
the fruit which gave a knowledge of both good and evil. Her intelligence
was very great. She quickly learned Italian, French, and Latin. She was
a daring horsewoman. She was a poet and an artist even in her teens. She
was also a keen judge of human motives, for those early years of hers
had forced her into a womanhood that was premature but wonderful. It had
been proposed that she should marry the eldest son of Catherine, so
that in time the kingdom of Scotland and that of France might be united,
while if Elizabeth of England were to die unmarried her realm also would
fall to this pair of children.

And so Mary, at sixteen, wedded the Dauphin Francis, who was a year her
junior. The prince was a wretched, whimpering little creature, with a
cankered body and a blighted soul. Marriage with such a husband seemed
absurd. It never was a marriage in reality. The sickly child would cry
all night, for he suffered from abscesses in his ears, and his manhood
had been prematurely taken from him. Nevertheless, within a twelvemonth
the French king died and Mary Stuart was Queen of France as well as of
Scotland, hampered only by her nominal obedience to the sick boy whom
she openly despised. At seventeen she showed herself a master spirit.
She held her own against the ambitious Catherine de' Medici, whom she
contemptuously nicknamed "the apothecary's daughter." For the brief
period of a year she was actually the ruler of France; but then her
husband died and she was left a widow, restless, ambitious, and yet no
longer having any of the power she loved.

Mary Stuart at this time had become a woman whose fascination was
exerted over all who knew her. She was very tall and very slim, with
chestnut hair, "like a flower of the heat, both lax and delicate." Her
skin was fair and pale, so clear and so transparent as to make the story
plausible that when she drank from a flask of wine, the red liquid could
be seen passing down her slender throat.

Yet with all this she was not fine in texture, but hardy as a man. She
could endure immense fatigue without yielding to it. Her supple form had
the strength of steel. There was a gleam in her hazel eyes that showed
her to be brimful of an almost fierce vitality. Young as she was,
she was the mistress of a thousand arts, and she exhaled a sort of
atmosphere that turned the heads of men. The Stuart blood made her
impatient of control, careless of state, and easy-mannered. The French
and the Tudor strain gave her vivacity. She could be submissive in
appearance while still persisting in her aims. She could be languorous
and seductive while cold within. Again, she could assume the haughtiness
which belonged to one who was twice a queen.

Two motives swayed her, and they fought together for supremacy. One was
the love of power, and the other was the love of love. The first was
natural to a girl who was a sovereign in her own right. The second was
inherited, and was then forced into a rank luxuriance by the sort
of life that she had seen about her. At eighteen she was a strangely
amorous creature, given to fondling and kissing every one about her,
with slight discrimination. From her sense of touch she received
emotions that were almost necessary to her existence. With her slender,
graceful hands she was always stroking the face of some favorite--it
might be only the face of a child, or it might be the face of some
courtier or poet, or one of the four Marys whose names are linked with
hers--Mary Livingstone, Mary Fleming, Mary Beaton, and Mary Seton, the
last of whom remained with her royal mistress until her death.

But one must not be too censorious in thinking of Mary Stuart. She was
surrounded everywhere by enemies. During her stay in France she was
hated by the faction of Catherine de' Medici. When she returned to
Scotland she was hated because of her religion by the Protestant lords.
Her every action was set forth in the worst possible light. The most
sinister meaning was given to everything she said or did. In truth, we
must reject almost all the stories which accuse her of anything more
than a certain levity of conduct.

She was not a woman to yield herself in love's last surrender unless her
intellect and heart alike had been made captive. She would listen to the
passionate outpourings of poets and courtiers, and she would plunge her
eyes into theirs, and let her hair just touch their faces, and give them
her white hands to kiss--but that was all. Even in this she was only
following the fashion of the court where she was bred, and she was
not unlike her royal relative, Elizabeth of England, who had the same
external amorousness coupled with the same internal self-control.

Mary Stuart's love life makes a piteous story, for it is the life of one
who was ever seeking--seeking for the man to whom she could look up, who
could be strong and brave and ardent like herself, and at the same time
be more powerful and more steadfast even than she herself in mind and
thought. Whatever may be said of her, and howsoever the facts may be
colored by partisans, this royal girl, stung though she was by passion
and goaded by desire, cared nothing for any man who could not match her
in body and mind and spirit all at once.

It was in her early widowhood that she first met the man, and when their
union came it brought ruin on them both. In France there came to her
one day one of her own subjects, the Earl of Bothwell. He was but a few
years older than she, and in his presence for the first time she
felt, in her own despite, that profoundly moving, indescribable, and
never-to-be-forgotten thrill which shakes a woman to the very center of
her being, since it is the recognition of a complete affinity.

Lord Bothwell, like Queen Mary, has been terribly maligned. Unlike her,
he has found only a few defenders. Maurice Hewlett has drawn a picture
of him more favorable than many, and yet it is a picture that repels.
Bothwell, says he, was of a type esteemed by those who pronounce vice
to be their virtue. He was "a galliard, flushed with rich blood,
broad-shouldered, square-jawed, with a laugh so happy and so prompt that
the world, rejoicing to hear it, thought all must be well wherever
he might be. He wore brave clothes, sat a brave horse, and kept brave
company bravely. His high color, while it betokened high feeding, got
him the credit of good health. His little eyes twinkled so merrily that
you did not see they were like a pig's, sly and greedy at once, and
bloodshot. His tawny beard concealed a jaw underhung, a chin jutting and
dangerous. His mouth had a cruel twist; but his laughing hid that too.
The bridge of his nose had been broken; few observed it, or guessed
at the brawl which must have given it to him. Frankness was his great
charm, careless ease in high places."

And so, when Mary Stuart first met him in her eighteenth year, Lord
Bothwell made her think as she had never thought of any other man, and
as she was not to think of any other man again. She grew to look eagerly
for the frank mockery "in those twinkling eyes, in that quick mouth";
and to wonder whether it was with him always--asleep, at prayers,
fighting, furious, or in love.

Something more, however, must be said of Bothwell. He was undoubtedly a
roisterer, but he was very much a man. He made easy love to women. His
sword leaped quickly from its sheath. He could fight, and he could also
think. He was no brawling ruffian, no ordinary rake. Remembering what
Scotland was in those days, Bothwell might well seem in reality a
princely figure. He knew Italian; he was at home in French; he could
write fluent Latin. He was a collector of books and a reader of them
also. He was perhaps the only Scottish noble of his time who had a
book-plate of his own. Here is something more than a mere reveler. Here
is a man of varied accomplishments and of a complex character.

Though he stayed but a short time near the queen in France, he kindled
her imagination, so that when she seriously thought of men she thought
of Bothwell. And yet all the time she was fondling the young pages in
her retinue and kissing her maids of honor with her scarlet lips, and
lying on their knees, while poets like Ronsard and Chastelard wrote
ardent love sonnets to her and sighed and pined for something more than
the privilege of kissing her two dainty hands.

In 1561, less than a year after her widowhood, Mary set sail for
Scotland, never to return. The great high-decked ships which escorted
her sailed into the harbor of Leith, and she pressed on to Edinburgh. A
depressing change indeed from the sunny terraces and fields of France!
In her own realm were fog and rain and only a hut to shelter her upon
her landing. When she reached her capital there were few welcoming
cheers; but as she rode over the cobblestones to Holyrood, the squalid
wynds vomited forth great mobs of hard-featured, grim-visaged men and
women who stared with curiosity and a half-contempt at the girl queen
and her retinue of foreigners.

The Scots were Protestants of the most dour sort, and they distrusted
their new ruler because of her religion and because she loved to
surround herself with dainty things and bright colors and exotic
elegance. They feared lest she should try to repeal the law of
Scotland's Parliament which had made the country Protestant.

The very indifference of her subjects stirred up the nobler part of
Mary's nature. For a time she was indeed a queen. She governed wisely.
She respected the religious rights of her Protestant subjects. She
strove to bring order out of the chaos into which her country had
fallen. And she met with some success. The time came when her people
cheered her as she rode among them. Her subtle fascination was her
greatest source of strength. Even John Knox, that iron-visaged,
stentorian preacher, fell for a time under the charm of her presence.
She met him frankly and pleaded with him as a woman, instead of
commanding him as a queen. The surly ranter became softened for a time,
and, though he spoke of her to others as "Honeypot," he ruled his tongue
in public. She had offers of marriage from Austrian and Spanish princes.
The new King of France, her brother-in-law, would perhaps have wedded
her. It mattered little to Mary that Elizabeth of England was hostile.
She felt that she was strong enough to hold her own and govern Scotland.

But who could govern a country such as Scotland was? It was a land of
broils and feuds, of clan enmities and fierce vendettas. Its nobles were
half barbarous, and they fought and slashed at one another with drawn
dirks almost in the presence of the queen herself. No matter whom she
favored, there rose up a swarm of enemies. Here was a Corsica of the
north, more savage and untamed than even the other Corsica.

In her perplexity Mary felt a woman's need of some man on whom she
would have the right to lean, and whom she could make king consort.
She thought that she had found him in the person of her cousin, Lord
Darnley, a Catholic, and by his upbringing half an Englishman. Darnley
came to Scotland, and for the moment Mary fancied that she had forgotten
Bothwell. Here again she was in love with love, and she idealized the
man who came to give it to her. Darnley seemed, indeed, well worthy to
be loved, for he was tall and handsome, appearing well on horseback and
having some of the accomplishments which Mary valued.

It was a hasty wooing, and the queen herself was first of all the wooer.
Her quick imagination saw in Darnley traits and gifts of which he really
had no share. Therefore, the marriage was soon concluded, and Scotland
had two sovereigns, King Henry and Queen Mary. So sure was Mary of her
indifference to Bothwell that she urged the earl to marry, and he did
marry a girl of the great house of Gordon.

Mary's self-suggested love for Darnley was extinguished almost on
her wedding-night. The man was a drunkard who came into her presence
befuddled and almost bestial. He had no brains. His vanity was enormous.
He loved no one but himself, and least of all this queen, whom he
regarded as having thrown herself at his empty head.

The first-fruits of the marriage were uprisings among the Protestant
lords. Mary then showed herself a heroic queen. At the head of a
motley band of soldiery who came at her call--half-clad, uncouth, and
savage--she rode into the west, sleeping at night upon the bare ground,
sharing the camp food, dressed in plain tartan, but swift and fierce
as any eagle. Her spirit ran like fire through the veins of those who
followed her. She crushed the insurrection, scattered its leaders, and
returned in triumph to her capital.

Now she was really queen, but here came in the other motive which was
interwoven in her character. She had shown herself a man in courage.
Should she not have the pleasures of a woman? To her court in Holyrood
came Bothwell once again, and this time Mary knew that he was all the
world to her. Darnley had shrunk from the hardships of battle. He was
steeped in low intrigues. He roused the constant irritation of the queen
by his folly and utter lack of sense and decency. Mary felt she owed him
nothing, but she forgot that she owed much to herself.

Her old amorous ways came back to her, and she relapsed into the joys of
sense. The scandal-mongers of the capital saw a lover in every man
with whom she talked. She did, in fact, set convention at defiance. She
dressed in men's clothing. She showed what the unemotional Scots thought
to be unseemly levity. The French poet, Chastelard, misled by her
external signs of favor, believed himself to be her choice. At the end
of one mad revel he was found secreted beneath her bed, and was driven
out by force. A second time he ventured to secrete himself within the
covers of the bed. Then he was dragged forth, imprisoned, and condemned
to death. He met his fate without a murmur, save at the last when he
stood upon the scaffold and, gazing toward the palace, cried in French:

"Oh, cruel queen! I die for you!"

Another favorite, the Italian, David Rizzio, or Riccio, in like manner
wrote love verses to the queen, and she replied to them in kind; but
there is no evidence that she valued him save for his ability, which
was very great. She made him her foreign secretary, and the man whom he
supplanted worked on the jealousy of Darnley; so that one night, while
Mary and Rizzio were at dinner in a small private chamber, Darnley and
the others broke in upon her. Darnley held her by the waist while Rizzio
was stabbed before her eyes with a cruelty the greater because the queen
was soon to become a mother.

From that moment she hated Darnley as one would hate a snake. She
tolerated him only that he might acknowledge her child as his son. This
child was the future James VI. of Scotland and James I. of England. It
is recorded of him that never throughout his life could he bear to look
upon drawn steel.

After this Mary summoned Bothwell again and again. It was revealed to
her as in a blaze of light that, after all, he was the one and only
man who could be everything to her. His frankness, his cynicism, his
mockery, his carelessness, his courage, and the power of his mind
matched her moods completely. She threw away all semblance of
concealment. She ignored the fact that he had married at her wish. She
was queen. She desired him. She must have him at any cost.

"Though I lose Scotland and England both," she cried in a passion of
abandonment, "I shall have him for my own!"

Bothwell, in his turn, was nothing loath, and they leaped at each other
like two flames.

It was then that Mary wrote those letters which were afterward
discovered in a casket and which were used against her when she was on
trial for her life. These so-called Casket Letters, though we have
not now the originals, are among the most extraordinary letters ever
written. All shame, all hesitation, all innocence, are flung away in
them. The writer is so fired with passion that each sentence is like
a cry to a lover in the dark. As De Peyster says: "In them the animal
instincts override and spur and lash the pen." Mary was committing to
paper the frenzied madness of a woman consumed to her very marrow by the
scorching blaze of unendurable desire.

Events moved quickly. Darnley, convalescent from an attack of smallpox,
was mysteriously destroyed by an explosion of gunpowder. Bothwell was
divorced from his young wife on curious grounds. A dispensation allowed
Mary to wed a Protestant, and she married Bothwell three months after
Darnley's death.

Here one sees the consummation of what had begun many years before
in France. From the moment that she and Bothwell met, their union was
inevitable. Seas could not sunder them. Other loves and other fancies
were as nothing to them. Even the bonds of marriage were burst asunder
so that these two fiery, panting souls could meet.

It was the irony of fate that when they had so met it was only to be
parted. Mary's subjects, outraged by her conduct, rose against her. As
she passed through the streets of Edinburgh the women hurled after
her indecent names. Great banners were raised with execrable daubs
representing the murdered Darnley. The short and dreadful monosyllable
which is familiar to us in the pages of the Bible was hurled after her
wherever she went.

With Bothwell by her side she led a wild and ragged horde of followers
against the rebellious nobles, whose forces met her at Carberry Hill.
Her motley followers melted away, and Mary surrendered to the hostile
chieftains, who took her to the castle at Lochleven. There she became
the mother of twins--a fact that is seldom mentioned by historians.
These children were the fruit of her union with Bothwell. From this time
forth she cared but little for herself, and she signed, without great
reluctance, a document by which she abdicated in favor of her infant
son.

Even in this place of imprisonment, however, her fascination had power
to charm. Among those who guarded her, two of the Douglas family--George
Douglas and William Douglas--for love of her, effected her escape. The
first attempt failed. Mary, disguised as a laundress, was betrayed by
the delicacy of her hands. But a second attempt was successful. The
queen passed through a postern gate and made her way to the lake, where
George Douglas met her with a boat. Crossing the lake, fifty horsemen
under Lord Claude Hamilton gave her their escort and bore her away in
safety.

But Mary was sick of Scotland, for Bothwell could not be there. She
had tasted all the bitterness of life, and for a few months all the
sweetness; but she would have no more of this rough and barbarous
country. Of her own free will she crossed the Solway into England, to
find herself at once a prisoner.

Never again did she set eyes on Bothwell. After the battle of Carberry
Hill he escaped to the north, gathered some ships together, and preyed
upon English merchantmen, very much as a pirate might have done. Ere
long, however, when he had learned of Mary's fate, he set sail for
Norway. King Frederick of Denmark made him a prisoner of state. He was
not confined within prison walls, however, but was allowed to hunt and
ride in the vicinity of Malmo Castle and of Dragsholm. It is probably in
Malmo Castle that he died. In 1858 a coffin which was thought to be
the coffin of the earl was opened, and a Danish artist sketched the
head--which corresponds quite well with the other portraits of the
ill-fated Scottish noble.

It is a sad story. Had Mary been less ambitious when she first met
Bothwell, or had he been a little bolder, they might have reigned
together and lived out their lives in the plenitude of that great love
which held them both in thrall. But a queen is not as other women; and
she found too late that the teaching of her heart was, after all, the
truest teaching. She went to her death as Bothwell went to his, alone,
in a strange, unfriendly land.

Yet, even this, perhaps, was better so. It has at least touched both
their lives with pathos and has made the name of Mary Stuart one to be
remembered throughout all the ages.





QUEEN CHRISTINA OF SWEDEN AND THE MARQUIS MONALDESCHI


Sweden to-day is one of the peaceful kingdoms of the world, whose people
are prosperous, well governed, and somewhat apart from the clash and
turmoil of other states and nations. Even the secession of Norway, a few
years ago, was accomplished without bloodshed, and now the two kingdoms
exist side by side as free from strife as they are with Denmark, which
once domineered and tyrannized over both.

It is difficult to believe that long ago, in the Middle Ages, the cities
of southern Sweden were among the great commercial centers of the world.
Stockholm and Lund ranked with London and Paris. They absorbed the
commerce of the northern seas, and were the admiration of thousands
of travelers and merchants who passed through them and trafficked with
them.

Much nearer to our own time, Sweden was the great military power of
northern Europe. The ambassadors of the Swedish kings were received with
the utmost deference in every court. Her soldiers won great battles
and ended mighty wars. The England of Cromwell and Charles II. was
unimportant and isolated in comparison with this northern kingdom, which
could pour forth armies of gigantic blond warriors, headed by generals
astute as well as brave.

It was no small matter, then, in 1626, that the loyal Swedes were hoping
that their queen would give birth to a male heir to succeed his splendid
father, Gustavus Adolphus, ranked by military historians as one of the
six great generals whom the world had so far produced. The queen, a
German princess of Brandenburg, had already borne two daughters, who
died in infancy. The expectation was wide-spread and intense that she
should now become the mother of a son; and the king himself was no less
anxious.

When the event occurred, the child was seen to be completely covered
with hair, and for this reason the attendants at first believed that it
was the desired boy. When their mistake was discovered they were afraid
to tell the king, who was waiting in his study for the announcement
to be made. At last, when no one else would go to him, his sister, the
Princess Caroline, volunteered to break the news.

Gustavus was in truth a chivalrous, high-bred monarch. Though he must
have been disappointed at the advent of a daughter, he showed no sign
of dissatisfaction or even of surprise; but, rising, he embraced his
sister, saying:

"Let us thank God. I hope this girl will be as good as a boy to me. May
God preserve her now that He has sent her!"

It is customary at almost all courts to pay less attention to the birth
of a princess than to that of a prince; but Gustavus displayed his
chivalry toward this little daughter, whom he named Christina. He
ordered that the full royal salute should be fired in every fortress of
his kingdom and that displays of fireworks, balls of honor, and court
functions should take place; "for," as he said, "this is the heir to my
throne." And so from the first he took his child under his own keeping
and treated her as if she were a much-loved son as well as a successor.

He joked about her looks when she was born, when she was mistaken for a
boy.

"She will be clever," he said, "for she has taken us all in!"

The Swedish people were as delighted with their little princess as were
the people of Holland when the present Queen Wilhelmina was born, to
carry on the succession of the House of Orange. On one occasion the king
and the small Christina, who were inseparable companions, happened
to approach a fortress where they expected to spend the night. The
commander of the castle was bound to fire a royal salute of fifty cannon
in honor of his sovereign; yet he dreaded the effect upon the princess
of such a roaring and bellowing of artillery. He therefore sent a
swift horseman to meet the royal party at a distance and explain his
perplexity. Should he fire these guns or not? Would the king give an
order?

Gustavus thought for a moment, and then replied:

"My daughter is the daughter of a soldier, and she must learn to lead a
soldier's life. Let the guns be fired!"

The procession moved on. Presently fire spurted from the embrasures of
the fort, and its batteries thundered in one great roar. The king looked
down at Christina. Her face was aglow with pleasure and excitement; she
clapped her hands and laughed, and cried out:

"More bang! More! More! More!"

This is only one of a score of stories that were circulated about the
princess, and the Swedes were more and more delighted with the girl who
was to be their queen.

Somewhat curiously, Christina's mother, Queen Maria, cared little for
the child, and, in fact, came at last to detest her almost as much as
the king loved her. It is hard to explain this dislike. Perhaps she had
a morbid desire for a son and begrudged the honors given to a daughter.
Perhaps she was a little jealous of her own child, who took so much of
the king's attention. Afterward, in writing of her mother, Christina
excuses her, and says quite frankly:

She could not bear to see me, because I was a girl, and an ugly girl at
that. And she was right enough, for I was as tawny as a little Turk.

This candid description of herself is hardly just. Christina was never
beautiful, and she had a harsh voice. She was apt to be overbearing
even as a little girl. Yet she was a most interesting child, with an
expressive face, large eyes, an aquiline nose, and the blond hair of her
people. There was nothing in this to account for her mother's intense
dislike for her.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


Project Gutenberg's The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes, by Arthur Conan Doyle

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes

Author: Arthur Conan Doyle

Posting Date: April 18, 2011 [EBook #1661]
First Posted: November 29, 2002

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES ***




Produced by an anonymous Project Gutenberg volunteer and Jose Menendez









THE ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES

by

SIR ARTHUR CONAN DOYLE



   I. A Scandal in Bohemia
  II. The Red-headed League
 III. A Case of Identity
  IV. The Boscombe Valley Mystery
   V. The Five Orange Pips
  VI. The Man with the Twisted Lip
 VII. The Adventure of the Blue Carbuncle
VIII. The Adventure of the Speckled Band
  IX. The Adventure of the Engineer's Thumb
   X. The Adventure of the Noble Bachelor
  XI. The Adventure of the Beryl Coronet
 XII. The Adventure of the Copper Beeches




ADVENTURE I. A SCANDAL IN BOHEMIA

I.

To Sherlock Holmes she is always THE woman. I have seldom heard
him mention her under any other name. In his eyes she eclipses
and predominates the whole of her sex. It was not that he felt
any emotion akin to love for Irene Adler. All emotions, and that
one particularly, were abhorrent to his cold, precise but
admirably balanced mind. He was, I take it, the most perfect
reasoning and observing machine that the world has seen, but as a
lover he would have placed himself in a false position. He never
spoke of the softer passions, save with a gibe and a sneer. They
were admirable things for the observer--excellent for drawing the
veil from men's motives and actions. But for the trained reasoner
to admit such intrusions into his own delicate and finely
adjusted temperament was to introduce a distracting factor which
might throw a doubt upon all his mental results. Grit in a
sensitive instrument, or a crack in one of his own high-power
lenses, would not be more disturbing than a strong emotion in a
nature such as his. And yet there was but one woman to him, and
that woman was the late Irene Adler, of dubious and questionable
memory.

I had seen little of Holmes lately. My marriage had drifted us
away from each other. My own complete happiness, and the
home-centred interests which rise up around the man who first
finds himself master of his own establishment, were sufficient to
absorb all my attention, while Holmes, who loathed every form of
society with his whole Bohemian soul, remained in our lodgings in
Baker Street, buried among his old books, and alternating from
week to week between cocaine and ambition, the drowsiness of the
drug, and the fierce energy of his own keen nature. He was still,
as ever, deeply attracted by the study of crime, and occupied his
immense faculties and extraordinary powers of observation in
following out those clues, and clearing up those mysteries which
had been abandoned as hopeless by the official police. From time
to time I heard some vague account of his doings: of his summons
to Odessa in the case of the Trepoff murder, of his clearing up
of the singular tragedy of the Atkinson brothers at Trincomalee,
and finally of the mission which he had accomplished so
delicately and successfully for the reigning family of Holland.
Beyond these signs of his activity, however, which I merely
shared with all the readers of the daily press, I knew little of
my former friend and companion.

One night--it was on the twentieth of March, 1888--I was
returning from a journey to a patient (for I had now returned to
civil practice), when my way led me through Baker Street. As I
passed the well-remembered door, which must always be associated
in my mind with my wooing, and with the dark incidents of the
Study in Scarlet, I was seized with a keen desire to see Holmes
again, and to know how he was employing his extraordinary powers.
His rooms were brilliantly lit, and, even as I looked up, I saw
his tall, spare figure pass twice in a dark silhouette against
the blind. He was pacing the room swiftly, eagerly, with his head
sunk upon his chest and his hands clasped behind him. To me, who
knew his every mood and habit, his attitude and manner told their
own story. He was at work again. He had risen out of his
drug-created dreams and was hot upon the scent of some new
problem. I rang the bell and was shown up to the chamber which
had formerly been in part my own.

His manner was not effusive. It seldom was; but he was glad, I
think, to see me. With hardly a word spoken, but with a kindly
eye, he waved me to an armchair, threw across his case of cigars,
and indicated a spirit case and a gasogene in the corner. Then he
stood before the fire and looked me over in his singular
introspective fashion.

"Wedlock suits you," he remarked. "I think, Watson, that you have
put on seven and a half pounds since I saw you."

"Seven!" I answered.

"Indeed, I should have thought a little more. Just a trifle more,
I fancy, Watson. And in practice again, I observe. You did not
tell me that you intended to go into harness."

"Then, how do you know?"

"I see it, I deduce it. How do I know that you have been getting
yourself very wet lately, and that you have a most clumsy and
careless servant girl?"

"My dear Holmes," said I, "this is too much. You would certainly
have been burned, had you lived a few centuries ago. It is true
that I had a country walk on Thursday and came home in a dreadful
mess, but as I have changed my clothes I can't imagine how you
deduce it. As to Mary Jane, she is incorrigible, and my wife has
given her notice, but there, again, I fail to see how you work it
out."

He chuckled to himself and rubbed his long, nervous hands
together.

"It is simplicity itself," said he; "my eyes tell me that on the
inside of your left shoe, just where the firelight strikes it,
the leather is scored by six almost parallel cuts. Obviously they
have been caused by someone who has very carelessly scraped round
the edges of the sole in order to remove crusted mud from it.
Hence, you see, my double deduction that you had been out in vile
weather, and that you had a particularly malignant boot-slitting
specimen of the London slavey. As to your practice, if a
gentleman walks into my rooms smelling of iodoform, with a black
mark of nitrate of silver upon his right forefinger, and a bulge
on the right side of his top-hat to show where he has secreted
his stethoscope, I must be dull, indeed, if I do not pronounce
him to be an active member of the medical profession."

I could not help laughing at the ease with which he explained his
process of deduction. "When I hear you give your reasons," I
remarked, "the thing always appears to me to be so ridiculously
simple that I could easily do it myself, though at each
successive instance of your reasoning I am baffled until you
explain your process. And yet I believe that my eyes are as good
as yours."

"Quite so," he answered, lighting a cigarette, and throwing
himself down into an armchair. "You see, but you do not observe.
The distinction is clear. For example, you have frequently seen
the steps which lead up from the hall to this room."

"Frequently."

"How often?"

"Well, some hundreds of times."

"Then how many are there?"

"How many? I don't know."

"Quite so! You have not observed. And yet you have seen. That is
just my point. Now, I know that there are seventeen steps,
because I have both seen and observed. By-the-way, since you are
interested in these little problems, and since you are good
enough to chronicle one or two of my trifling experiences, you
may be interested in this." He threw over a sheet of thick,
pink-tinted note-paper which had been lying open upon the table.
"It came by the last post," said he. "Read it aloud."

The note was undated, and without either signature or address.

"There will call upon you to-night, at a quarter to eight
o'clock," it said, "a gentleman who desires to consult you upon a
matter of the very deepest moment. Your recent services to one of
the royal houses of Europe have shown that you are one who may
safely be trusted with matters which are of an importance which
can hardly be exaggerated. This account of you we have from all
quarters received. Be in your chamber then at that hour, and do
not take it amiss if your visitor wear a mask."

"This is indeed a mystery," I remarked. "What do you imagine that
it means?"

"I have no data yet. It is a capital mistake to theorize before
one has data. Insensibly one begins to twist facts to suit
theories, instead of theories to suit facts. But the note itself.
What do you deduce from it?"

I carefully examined the writing, and the paper upon which it was
written.

"The man who wrote it was presumably well to do," I remarked,
endeavouring to imitate my companion's processes. "Such paper
could not be bought under half a crown a packet. It is peculiarly
strong and stiff."

"Peculiar--that is the very word," said Holmes. "It is not an
English paper at all. Hold it up to the light."

I did so, and saw a large "E" with a small "g," a "P," and a
large "G" with a small "t" woven into the texture of the paper.

"What do you make of that?" asked Holmes.

"The name of the maker, no doubt; or his monogram, rather."

"Not at all. The 'G' with the small 't' stands for
'Gesellschaft,' which is the German for 'Company.' It is a
customary contraction like our 'Co.' 'P,' of course, stands for
'Papier.' Now for the 'Eg.' Let us glance at our Continental
Gazetteer." He took down a heavy brown volume from his shelves.
"Eglow, Eglonitz--here we are, Egria. It is in a German-speaking
country--in Bohemia, not far from Carlsbad. 'Remarkable as being
the scene of the death of Wallenstein, and for its numerous
glass-factories and paper-mills.' Ha, ha, my boy, what do you
make of that?" His eyes sparkled, and he sent up a great blue
triumphant cloud from his cigarette.

"The paper was made in Bohemia," I said.

"Precisely. And the man who wrote the note is a German. Do you
note the peculiar construction of the sentence--'This account of
you we have from all quarters received.' A Frenchman or Russian
could not have written that. It is the German who is so
uncourteous to his verbs. It only remains, therefore, to discover
what is wanted by this German who writes upon Bohemian paper and
prefers wearing a mask to showing his face. And here he comes, if
I am not mistaken, to resolve all our doubts."

As he spoke there was the sharp sound of horses' hoofs and
grating wheels against the curb, followed by a sharp pull at the
bell. Holmes whistled.

"A pair, by the sound," said he. "Yes," he continued, glancing
out of the window. "A nice little brougham and a pair of
beauties. A hundred and fifty guineas apiece. There's money in
this case, Watson, if there is nothing else."

"I think that I had better go, Holmes."

"Not a bit, Doctor. Stay where you are. I am lost without my
Boswell. And this promises to be interesting. It would be a pity
to miss it."

"But your client--"

"Never mind him. I may want your help, and so may he. Here he
comes. Sit down in that armchair, Doctor, and give us your best
attention."

A slow and heavy step, which had been heard upon the stairs and
in the passage, paused immediately outside the door. Then there
was a loud and authoritative tap.

"Come in!" said Holmes.

A man entered who could hardly have been less than six feet six
inches in height, with the chest and limbs of a Hercules. His
dress was rich with a richness which would, in England, be looked
upon as akin to bad taste. Heavy bands of astrakhan were slashed
across the sleeves and fronts of his double-breasted coat, while
the deep blue cloak which was thrown over his shoulders was lined
with flame-coloured silk and secured at the neck with a brooch
which consisted of a single flaming beryl. Boots which extended
halfway up his calves, and which were trimmed at the tops with
rich brown fur, completed the impression of barbaric opulence
which was suggested by his whole appearance. He carried a
broad-brimmed hat in his hand, while he wore across the upper
part of his face, extending down past the cheekbones, a black
vizard mask, which he had apparently adjusted that very moment,
for his hand was still raised to it as he entered. From the lower
part of the face he appeared to be a man of strong character,
with a thick, hanging lip, and a long, straight chin suggestive
of resolution pushed to the length of obstinacy.

"You had my note?" he asked with a deep harsh voice and a
strongly marked German accent. "I told you that I would call." He
looked from one to the other of us, as if uncertain which to
address.

"Pray take a seat," said Holmes. "This is my friend and
colleague, Dr. Watson, who is occasionally good enough to help me
in my cases. Whom have I the honour to address?"

"You may address me as the Count Von Kramm, a Bohemian nobleman.
I understand that this gentleman, your friend, is a man of honour
and discretion, whom I may trust with a matter of the most
extreme importance. If not, I should much prefer to communicate
with you alone."

I rose to go, but Holmes caught me by the wrist and pushed me
back into my chair. "It is both, or none," said he. "You may say
before this gentleman anything which you may say to me."

The Count shrugged his broad shoulders. "Then I must begin," said
he, "by binding you both to absolute secrecy for two years; at
the end of that time the matter will be of no importance. At
present it is not too much to say that it is of such weight it
may have an influence upon European history."

"I promise," said Holmes.

"And I."

"You will excuse this mask," continued our strange visitor. "The
august person who employs me wishes his agent to be unknown to
you, and I may confess at once that the title by which I have
just called myself is not exactly my own."

"I was aware of it," said Holmes dryly.

"The circumstances are of great delicacy, and every precaution
has to be taken to quench what might grow to be an immense
scandal and seriously compromise one of the reigning families of
Europe. To speak plainly, the matter implicates the great House
of Ormstein, hereditary kings of Bohemia."

"I was also aware of that," murmured Holmes, settling himself
down in his armchair and closing his eyes.

Our visitor glanced with some apparent surprise at the languid,
lounging figure of the man who had been no doubt depicted to him
as the most incisive reasoner and most energetic agent in Europe.
Holmes slowly reopened his eyes and looked impatiently at his
gigantic client.

"If your Majesty would condescend to state your case," he
remarked, "I should be better able to advise you."

The man sprang from his chair and paced up and down the room in
uncontrollable agitation. Then, with a gesture of desperation, he
tore the mask from his face and hurled it upon the ground. "You
are right," he cried; "I am the King. Why should I attempt to
conceal it?"

"Why, indeed?" murmured Holmes. "Your Majesty had not spoken
before I was aware that I was addressing Wilhelm Gottsreich
Sigismond von Ormstein, Grand Duke of Cassel-Felstein, and
hereditary King of Bohemia."

"But you can understand," said our strange visitor, sitting down
once more and passing his hand over his high white forehead, "you
can understand that I am not accustomed to doing such business in
my own person. Yet the matter was so delicate that I could not
confide it to an agent without putting myself in his power. I
have come incognito from Prague for the purpose of consulting
you."

"Then, pray consult," said Holmes, shutting his eyes once more.

"The facts are briefly these: Some five years ago, during a
lengthy visit to Warsaw, I made the acquaintance of the well-known
adventuress, Irene Adler. The name is no doubt familiar to you."

"Kindly look her up in my index, Doctor," murmured Holmes without
opening his eyes. For many years he had adopted a system of
docketing all paragraphs concerning men and things, so that it
was difficult to name a subject or a person on which he could not
at once furnish information. In this case I found her biography
sandwiched in between that of a Hebrew rabbi and that of a
staff-commander who had written a monograph upon the deep-sea
fishes.

"Let me see!" said Holmes. "Hum! Born in New Jersey in the year
1858. Contralto--hum! La Scala, hum! Prima donna Imperial Opera
of Warsaw--yes! Retired from operatic stage--ha! Living in
London--quite so! Your Majesty, as I understand, became entangled
with this young person, wrote her some compromising letters, and
is now desirous of getting those letters back."

"Precisely so. But how--"

"Was there a secret marriage?"

"None."

"No legal papers or certificates?"

"None."

"Then I fail to follow your Majesty. If this young person should
produce her letters for blackmailing or other purposes, how is
she to prove their authenticity?"

"There is the writing."

"Pooh, pooh! Forgery."

"My private note-paper."

"Stolen."

"My own seal."

"Imitated."

"My photograph."

"Bought."

"We were both in the photograph."

"Oh, dear! That is very bad! Your Majesty has indeed committed an
indiscretion."

"I was mad--insane."

"You have compromised yourself seriously."

"I was only Crown Prince then. I was young. I am but thirty now."

"It must be recovered."

"We have tried and failed."

"Your Majesty must pay. It must be bought."

"She will not sell."

"Stolen, then."

"Five attempts have been made. Twice burglars in my pay ransacked
her house. Once we diverted her luggage when she travelled. Twice
she has been waylaid. There has been no result."

"No sign of it?"

"Absolutely none."

Holmes laughed. "It is quite a pretty little problem," said he.

"But a very serious one to me," returned the King reproachfully.

"Very, indeed. And what does she propose to do with the
photograph?"

"To ruin me."

"But how?"

"I am about to be married."

"So I have heard."

"To Clotilde Lothman von Saxe-Meningen, second daughter of the
King of Scandinavia. You may know the strict principles of her
family. She is herself the very soul of delicacy. A shadow of a
doubt as to my conduct would bring the matter to an end."

"And Irene Adler?"

"Threatens to send them the photograph. And she will do it. I
know that she will do it. You do not know her, but she has a soul
of steel. She has the face of the most beautiful of women, and
the mind of the most resolute of men. Rather than I should marry
another woman, there are no lengths to which she would not
go--none."

"You are sure that she has not sent it yet?"

"I am sure."

"And why?"

"Because she has said that she would send it on the day when the
betrothal was publicly proclaimed. That will be next Monday."

"Oh, then we have three days yet," said Holmes with a yawn. "That
is very fortunate, as I have one or two matters of importance to
look into just at present. Your Majesty will, of course, stay in
London for the present?"

"Certainly. You will find me at the Langham under the name of the
Count Von Kramm."

"Then I shall drop you a line to let you know how we progress."

"Pray do so. I shall be all anxiety."

"Then, as to money?"

"You have carte blanche."

"Absolutely?"

"I tell you that I would give one of the provinces of my kingdom
to have that photograph."

"And for present expenses?"

The King took a heavy chamois leather bag from under his cloak
and laid it on the table.

"There are three hundred pounds in gold and seven hundred in
notes," he said.

Holmes scribbled a receipt upon a sheet of his note-book and
handed it to him.

"And Mademoiselle's address?" he asked.

"Is Briony Lodge, Serpentine Avenue, St. John's Wood."

Holmes took a note of it. "One other question," said he. "Was the
photograph a cabinet?"

"It was."

"Then, good-night, your Majesty, and I trust that we shall soon
have some good news for you. And good-night, Watson," he added,
as the wheels of the royal brougham rolled down the street. "If
you will be good enough to call to-morrow afternoon at three
o'clock I should like to chat this little matter over with you."


II.

At three o'clock precisely I was at Baker Street, but Holmes had
not yet returned. The landlady informed me that he had left the
house shortly after eight o'clock in the morning. I sat down
beside the fire, however, with the intention of awaiting him,
however long he might be. I was already deeply interested in his
inquiry, for, though it was surrounded by none of the grim and
strange features which were associated with the two crimes which
I have already recorded, still, the nature of the case and the
exalted station of his client gave it a character of its own.
Indeed, apart from the nature of the investigation which my
friend had on hand, there was something in his masterly grasp of
a situation, and his keen, incisive reasoning, which made it a
pleasure to me to study his system of work, and to follow the
quick, subtle methods by which he disentangled the most
inextricable mysteries. So accustomed was I to his invariable
success that the very possibility of his failing had ceased to
enter into my head.

It was close upon four before the door opened, and a
drunken-looking groom, ill-kempt and side-whiskered, with an
inflamed face and disreputable clothes, walked into the room.
Accustomed as I was to my friend's amazing powers in the use of
disguises, I had to look three times before I was certain that it
was indeed he. With a nod he vanished into the bedroom, whence he
emerged in five minutes tweed-suited and respectable, as of old.
Putting his hands into his pockets, he stretched out his legs in
front of the fire and laughed heartily for some minutes.

"Well, really!" he cried, and then he choked and laughed again
until he was obliged to lie back, limp and helpless, in the
chair.

"What is it?"

"It's quite too funny. I am sure you could never guess how I
employed my morning, or what I ended by doing."

"I can't imagine. I suppose that you have been watching the
habits, and perhaps the house, of Miss Irene Adler."

"Quite so; but the sequel was rather unusual. I will tell you,
however. I left the house a little after eight o'clock this
morning in the character of a groom out of work. There is a
wonderful sympathy and freemasonry among horsey men. Be one of
them, and you will know all that there is to know. I soon found
Briony Lodge. It is a bijou villa, with a garden at the back, but
built out in front right up to the road, two stories. Chubb lock
to the door. Large sitting-room on the right side, well
furnished, with long windows almost to the floor, and those
preposterous English window fasteners which a child could open.
Behind there was nothing remarkable, save that the passage window
could be reached from the top of the coach-house. I walked round
it and examined it closely from every point of view, but without
noting anything else of interest.

"I then lounged down the street and found, as I expected, that
there was a mews in a lane which runs down by one wall of the
garden. I lent the ostlers a hand in rubbing down their horses,
and received in exchange twopence, a glass of half and half, two
fills of shag tobacco, and as much information as I could desire
about Miss Adler, to say nothing of half a dozen other people in
the neighbourhood in whom I was not in the least interested, but
whose biographies I was compelled to listen to."

"And what of Irene Adler?" I asked.

"Oh, she has turned all the men's heads down in that part. She is
the daintiest thing under a bonnet on this planet. So say the
Serpentine-mews, to a man. She lives quietly, sings at concerts,
drives out at five every day, and returns at seven sharp for
dinner. Seldom goes out at other times, except when she sings.
Has only one male visitor, but a good deal of him. He is dark,
handsome, and dashing, never calls less than once a day, and
often twice. He is a Mr. Godfrey Norton, of the Inner Temple. See
the advantages of a cabman as a confidant. They had driven him
home a dozen times from Serpentine-mews, and knew all about him.
When I had listened to all they had to tell, I began to walk up
and down near Briony Lodge once more, and to think over my plan
of campaign.

"This Godfrey Norton was evidently an important factor in the
matter. He was a lawyer. That sounded ominous. What was the
relation between them, and what the object of his repeated
visits? Was she his client, his friend, or his mistress? If the
former, she had probably transferred the photograph to his
keeping. If the latter, it was less likely. On the issue of this
question depended whether I should continue my work at Briony
Lodge, or turn my attention to the gentleman's chambers in the
Temple. It was a delicate point, and it widened the field of my
inquiry. I fear that I bore you with these details, but I have to
let you see my little difficulties, if you are to understand the
situation."

"I am following you closely," I answered.

"I was still balancing the matter in my mind when a hansom cab
drove up to Briony Lodge, and a gentleman sprang out. He was a
remarkably handsome man, dark, aquiline, and moustached--evidently
the man of whom I had heard. He appeared to be in a
great hurry, shouted to the cabman to wait, and brushed past the
maid who opened the door with the air of a man who was thoroughly
at home.

"He was in the house about half an hour, and I could catch
glimpses of him in the windows of the sitting-room, pacing up and
down, talking excitedly, and waving his arms. Of her I could see
nothing. Presently he emerged, looking even more flurried than
before. As he stepped up to the cab, he pulled a gold watch from
his pocket and looked at it earnestly, 'Drive like the devil,' he
shouted, 'first to Gross & Hankey's in Regent Street, and then to
the Church of St. Monica in the Edgeware Road. Half a guinea if
you do it in twenty minutes!'

"Away they went, and I was just wondering whether I should not do
well to follow them when up the lane came a neat little landau,
the coachman with his coat only half-buttoned, and his tie under
his ear, while all the tags of his harness were sticking out of
the buckles. It hadn't pulled up before she shot out of the hall
door and into it. I only caught a glimpse of her at the moment,
but she was a lovely woman, with a face that a man might die for.

"'The Church of St. Monica, John,' she cried, 'and half a
sovereign if you reach it in twenty minutes.'

"This was quite too good to lose, Watson. I was just balancing
whether I should run for it, or whether I should perch behind her
landau when a cab came through the street. The driver looked
twice at such a shabby fare, but I jumped in before he could
object. 'The Church of St. Monica,' said I, 'and half a sovereign
if you reach it in twenty minutes.' It was twenty-five minutes to
twelve, and of course it was clear enough what was in the wind.

"My cabby drove fast. I don't think I ever drove faster, but the
others were there before us. The cab and the landau with their
steaming horses were in front of the door when I arrived. I paid
the man and hurried into the church. There was not a soul there
save the two whom I had followed and a surpliced clergyman, who
seemed to be expostulating with them. They were all three
standing in a knot in front of the altar. I lounged up the side
aisle like any other idler who has dropped into a church.
Suddenly, to my surprise, the three at the altar faced round to
me, and Godfrey Norton came running as hard as he could towards
me.

"'Thank God,' he cried. 'You'll do. Come! Come!'

"'What then?' I asked.

"'Come, man, come, only three minutes, or it won't be legal.'

"I was half-dragged up to the altar, and before I knew where I was
I found myself mumbling responses which were whispered in my ear,
and vouching for things of which I knew nothing, and generally
assisting in the secure tying up of Irene Adler, spinster, to
Godfrey Norton, bachelor. It was all done in an instant, and
there was the gentleman thanking me on the one side and the lady
on the other, while the clergyman beamed on me in front. It was
the most preposterous position in which I ever found myself in my
life, and it was the thought of it that started me laughing just
now. It seems that there had been some informality about their
license, that the clergyman absolutely refused to marry them
without a witness of some sort, and that my lucky appearance
saved the bridegroom from having to sally out into the streets in
search of a best man. The bride gave me a sovereign, and I mean
to wear it on my watch-chain in memory of the occasion."

"This is a very unexpected turn of affairs," said I; "and what
then?"

"Well, I found my plans very seriously menaced. It looked as if
the pair might take an immediate departure, and so necessitate
very prompt and energetic measures on my part. At the church
door, however, they separated, he driving back to the Temple, and
she to her own house. 'I shall drive out in the park at five as
usual,' she said as she left him. I heard no more. They drove
away in different directions, and I went off to make my own
arrangements."

"Which are?"

"Some cold beef and a glass of beer," he answered, ringing the
bell. "I have been too busy to think of food, and I am likely to
be busier still this evening. By the way, Doctor, I shall want
your co-operation."

"I shall be delighted."

"You don't mind breaking the law?"

"Not in the least."

"Nor running a chance of arrest?"

"Not in a good cause."

"Oh, the cause is excellent!"

"Then I am your man."

"I was sure that I might rely on you."

"But what is it you wish?"

"When Mrs. Turner has brought in the tray I will make it clear to
you. Now," he said as he turned hungrily on the simple fare that
our landlady had provided, "I must discuss it while I eat, for I
have not much time. It is nearly five now. In two hours we must
be on the scene of action. Miss Irene, or Madame, rather, returns
from her drive at seven. We must be at Briony Lodge to meet her."

"And what then?"

"You must leave that to me. I have already arranged what is to
occur. There is only one point on which I must insist. You must
not interfere, come what may. You understand?"

"I am to be neutral?"

"To do nothing whatever. There will probably be some small
unpleasantness. Do not join in it. It will end in my being
conveyed into the house. Four or five minutes afterwards the
sitting-room window will open. You are to station yourself close
to that open window."

"Yes."

"You are to watch me, for I will be visible to you."

"Yes."

"And when I raise my hand--so--you will throw into the room what
I give you to throw, and will, at the same time, raise the cry of
fire. You quite follow me?"

"Entirely."

"It is nothing very formidable," he said, taking a long cigar-shaped
roll from his pocket. "It is an ordinary plumber's smoke-rocket,
fitted with a cap at either end to make it self-lighting.
Your task is confined to that. When you raise your cry of fire,
it will be taken up by quite a number of people. You may then
walk to the end of the street, and I will rejoin you in ten
minutes. I hope that I have made myself clear?"

"I am to remain neutral, to get near the window, to watch you,
and at the signal to throw in this object, then to raise the cry
of fire, and to wait you at the corner of the street."

"Precisely."

"Then you may entirely rely on me."

"That is excellent. I think, perhaps, it is almost time that I
prepare for the new role I have to play."

He disappeared into his bedroom and returned in a few minutes in
the character of an amiable and simple-minded Nonconformist
clergyman. His broad black hat, his baggy trousers, his white
tie, his sympathetic smile, and general look of peering and
benevolent curiosity were such as Mr. John Hare alone could have
equalled. It was not merely that Holmes changed his costume. His
expression, his manner, his very soul seemed to vary with every
fresh part that he assumed. The stage lost a fine actor, even as
science lost an acute reasoner, when he became a specialist in
crime.

It was a quarter past six when we left Baker Street, and it still
wanted ten minutes to the hour when we found ourselves in
Serpentine Avenue. It was already dusk, and the lamps were just
being lighted as we paced up and down in front of Briony Lodge,
waiting for the coming of its occupant. The house was just such
as I had pictured it from Sherlock Holmes' succinct description,
but the locality appeared to be less private than I expected. On
the contrary, for a small street in a quiet neighbourhood, it was
remarkably animated. There was a group of shabbily dressed men
smoking and laughing in a corner, a scissors-grinder with his
wheel, two guardsmen who were flirting with a nurse-girl, and
several well-dressed young men who were lounging up and down with
cigars in their mouths.

"You see," remarked Holmes, as we paced to and fro in front of
the house, "this marriage rather simplifies matters. The
photograph becomes a double-edged weapon now. The chances are
that she would be as averse to its being seen by Mr. Godfrey
Norton, as our client is to its coming to the eyes of his
princess. Now the question is, Where are we to find the
photograph?"

"Where, indeed?"

"It is most unlikely that she carries it about with her. It is
cabinet size. Too large for easy concealment about a woman's
dress. She knows that the King is capable of having her waylaid
and searched. Two attempts of the sort have already been made. We
may take it, then, that she does not carry it about with her."

"Where, then?"

"Her banker or her lawyer. There is that double possibility. But
I am inclined to think neither. Women are naturally secretive,
and they like to do their own secreting. Why should she hand it
over to anyone else? She could trust her own guardianship, but
she could not tell what indirect or political influence might be
brought to bear upon a business man. Besides, remember that she
had resolved to use it within a few days. It must be where she
can lay her hands upon it. It must be in her own house."

"But it has twice been burgled."

"Pshaw! They did not know how to look."

"But how will you look?"

"I will not look."

"What then?"

"I will get her to show me."

"But she will refuse."

"She will not be able to. But I hear the rumble of wheels. It is
her carriage. Now carry out my orders to the letter."

As he spoke the gleam of the side-lights of a carriage came round
the curve of the avenue. It was a smart little landau which
rattled up to the door of Briony Lodge. As it pulled up, one of
the loafing men at the corner dashed forward to open the door in
the hope of earning a copper, but was elbowed away by another
loafer, who had rushed up with the same intention. A fierce
quarrel broke out, which was increased by the two guardsmen, who
took sides with one of the loungers, and by the scissors-grinder,
who was equally hot upon the other side. A blow was struck, and
in an instant the lady, who had stepped from her carriage, was
the centre of a little knot of flushed and struggling men, who
struck savagely at each other with their fists and sticks. Holmes
dashed into the crowd to protect the lady; but just as he reached
her he gave a cry and dropped to the ground, with the blood
running freely down his face. At his fall the guardsmen took to
their heels in one direction and the loungers in the other, while
a number of better-dressed people, who had watched the scuffle
without taking part in it, crowded in to help the lady and to
attend to the injured man. Irene Adler, as I will still call her,
had hurried up the steps; but she stood at the top with her
superb figure outlined against the lights of the hall, looking
back into the street.

"Is the poor gentleman much hurt?" she asked.

"He is dead," cried several voices.

"No, no, there's life in him!" shouted another. "But he'll be
gone before you can get him to hospital."

"He's a brave fellow," said a woman. "They would have had the
lady's purse and watch if it hadn't been for him. They were a
gang, and a rough one, too. Ah, he's breathing now."

"He can't lie in the street. May we bring him in, marm?"

"Surely. Bring him into the sitting-room. There is a comfortable
sofa. This way, please!"

Slowly and solemnly he was borne into Briony Lodge and laid out
in the principal room, while I still observed the proceedings
from my post by the window. The lamps had been lit, but the
blinds had not been drawn, so that I could see Holmes as he lay
upon the couch. I do not know whether he was seized with
compunction at that moment for the part he was playing, but I
know that I never felt more heartily ashamed of myself in my life
than when I saw the beautiful creature against whom I was
conspiring, or the grace and kindliness with which she waited
upon the injured man. And yet it would be the blackest treachery
to Holmes to draw back now from the part which he had intrusted
to me. I hardened my heart, and took the smoke-rocket from under
my ulster. After all, I thought, we are not injuring her. We are
but preventing her from injuring another.

Holmes had sat up upon the couch, and I saw him motion like a man
who is in need of air. A maid rushed across and threw open the
window. At the same instant I saw him raise his hand and at the
signal I tossed my rocket into the room with a cry of "Fire!" The
word was no sooner out of my mouth than the whole crowd of
spectators, well dressed and ill--gentlemen, ostlers, and
servant-maids--joined in a general shriek of "Fire!" Thick clouds
of smoke curled through the room and out at the open window. I
caught a glimpse of rushing figures, and a moment later the voice
of Holmes from within assuring them that it was a false alarm.
Slipping through the shouting crowd I made my way to the corner
of the street, and in ten minutes was rejoiced to find my
friend's arm in mine, and to get away from the scene of uproar.
He walked swiftly and in silence for some few minutes until we
had turned down one of the quiet streets which lead towards the
Edgeware Road.

"You did it very nicely, Doctor," he remarked. "Nothing could
have been better. It is all right."

"You have the photograph?"

"I know where it is."

"And how did you find out?"

"She showed me, as I told you she would."

"I am still in the dark."

"I do not wish to make a mystery," said he, laughing. "The matter
was perfectly simple. You, of course, saw that everyone in the
street was an accomplice. They were all engaged for the evening."

"I guessed as much."

"Then, when the row broke out, I had a little moist red paint in
the palm of my hand. I rushed forward, fell down, clapped my hand
to my face, and became a piteous spectacle. It is an old trick."

"That also I could fathom."

"Then they carried me in. She was bound to have me in. What else
could she do? And into her sitting-room, which was the very room
which I suspected. It lay between that and her bedroom, and I was
determined to see which. They laid me on a couch, I motioned for
air, they were compelled to open the window, and you had your
chance."

"How did that help you?"

"It was all-important. When a woman thinks that her house is on
fire, her instinct is at once to rush to the thing which she
values most. It is a perfectly overpowering impulse, and I have
more than once taken advantage of it. In the case of the
Darlington substitution scandal it was of use to me, and also in
the Arnsworth Castle business. A married woman grabs at her baby;
an unmarried one reaches for her jewel-box. Now it was clear to
me that our lady of to-day had nothing in the house more precious
to her than what we are in quest of. She would rush to secure it.
The alarm of fire was admirably done. The smoke and shouting were
enough to shake nerves of steel. She responded beautifully. The
photograph is in a recess behind a sliding panel just above the
right bell-pull. She was there in an instant, and I caught a
glimpse of it as she half-drew it out. When I cried out that it
was a false alarm, she replaced it, glanced at the rocket, rushed
from the room, and I have not seen her since. I rose, and, making
my excuses, escaped from the house. I hesitated whether to
attempt to secure the photograph at once; but the coachman had
come in, and as he was watching me narrowly it seemed safer to
wait. A little over-precipitance may ruin all."

"And now?" I asked.

"Our quest is practically finished. I shall call with the King
to-morrow, and with you, if you care to come with us. We will be
shown into the sitting-room to wait for the lady, but it is
probable that when she comes she may find neither us nor the
photograph. It might be a satisfaction to his Majesty to regain
it with his own hands."

"And when will you call?"

"At eight in the morning. She will not be up, so that we shall
have a clear field. Besides, we must be prompt, for this marriage
may mean a complete change in her life and habits. I must wire to
the King without delay."

We had reached Baker Street and had stopped at the door. He was
searching his pockets for the key when someone passing said:

"Good-night, Mister Sherlock Holmes."

There were several people on the pavement at the time, but the
greeting appeared to come from a slim youth in an ulster who had
hurried by.

"I've heard that voice before," said Holmes, staring down the
dimly lit street. "Now, I wonder who the deuce that could have
been."


III.

I slept at Baker Street that night, and we were engaged upon our
toast and coffee in the morning when the King of Bohemia rushed
into the room.

"You have really got it!" he cried, grasping Sherlock Holmes by
either shoulder and looking eagerly into his face.

"Not yet."

"But you have hopes?"

"I have hopes."

"Then, come. I am all impatience to be gone."

"We must have a cab."

"No, my brougham is waiting."

"Then that will simplify matters." We descended and started off
once more for Briony Lodge.

"Irene Adler is married," remarked Holmes.

"Married! When?"

"Yesterday."

"But to whom?"

"To an English lawyer named Norton."

"But she could not love him."

"I am in hopes that she does."

"And why in hopes?"

"Because it would spare your Majesty all fear of future
annoyance. If the lady loves her husband, she does not love your
Majesty. If she does not love your Majesty, there is no reason
why she should interfere with your Majesty's plan."

"It is true. And yet--Well! I wish she had been of my own
station! What a queen she would have made!" He relapsed into a
moody silence, which was not broken until we drew up in
Serpentine Avenue.

The door of Briony Lodge was open, and an elderly woman stood
upon the steps. She watched us with a sardonic eye as we stepped
from the brougham.

"Mr. Sherlock Holmes, I believe?" said she.

"I am Mr. Holmes," answered my companion, looking at her with a
questioning and rather startled gaze.

"Indeed! My mistress told me that you were likely to call. She
left this morning with her husband by the 5:15 train from Charing
Cross for the Continent."

"What!" Sherlock Holmes staggered back, white with chagrin and
surprise. "Do you mean that she has left England?"

"Never to return."

"And the papers?" asked the King hoarsely. "All is lost."

"We shall see." He pushed past the servant and rushed into the
drawing-room, followed by the King and myself. The furniture was
scattered about in every direction, with dismantled shelves and
open drawers, as if the lady had hurriedly ransacked them before
her flight. Holmes rushed at the bell-pull, tore back a small
sliding shutter, and, plunging in his hand, pulled out a
photograph and a letter. The photograph was of Irene Adler
herself in evening dress, the letter was superscribed to
"Sherlock Holmes, Esq. To be left till called for." My friend
tore it open and we all three read it together. It was dated at
midnight of the preceding night and ran in this way:

"MY DEAR MR. SHERLOCK HOLMES,--You really did it very well. You
took me in completely. Until after the alarm of fire, I had not a
suspicion. But then, when I found how I had betrayed myself, I
began to think. I had been warned against you months ago. I had
been told that if the King employed an agent it would certainly
be you. And your address had been given me. Yet, with all this,
you made me reveal what you wanted to know. Even after I became
suspicious, I found it hard to think evil of such a dear, kind
old clergyman. But, you know, I have been trained as an actress
myself. Male costume is nothing new to me. I often take advantage
of the freedom which it gives. I sent John, the coachman, to
watch you, ran up stairs, got into my walking-clothes, as I call
them, and came down just as you departed.

"Well, I followed you to your door, and so made sure that I was
really an object of interest to the celebrated Mr. Sherlock
Holmes. Then I, rather imprudently, wished you good-night, and
started for the Temple to see my husband.

"We both thought the best resource was flight, when pursued by
so formidable an antagonist; so you will find the nest empty when
you call to-morrow. As to the photograph, your client may rest in
peace. I love and am loved by a better man than he. The King may
do what he will without hindrance from one whom he has cruelly
wronged. I keep it only to safeguard myself, and to preserve a
weapon which will always secure me from any steps which he might
take in the future. I leave a photograph which he might care to
possess; and I remain, dear Mr. Sherlock Holmes,

                                      "Very truly yours,
                                   "IRENE NORTON, née ADLER."

"What a woman--oh, what a woman!" cried the King of Bohemia, when
we had all three read this epistle. "Did I not tell you how quick
and resolute she was? Would she not have made an admirable queen?
Is it not a pity that she was not on my level?"

"From what I have seen of the lady she seems indeed to be on a
very different level to your Majesty," said Holmes coldly. "I am
sorry that I have not been able to bring your Majesty's business
to a more successful conclusion."

"On the contrary, my dear sir," cried the King; "nothing could be
more successful. I know that her word is inviolate. The
photograph is now as safe as if it were in the fire."

"I am glad to hear your Majesty say so."

"I am immensely indebted to you. Pray tell me in what way I can
reward you. This ring--" He slipped an emerald snake ring from
his finger and held it out upon the palm of his hand.

"Your Majesty has something which I should value even more
highly," said Holmes.

"You have but to name it."

"This photograph!"

The King stared at him in amazement.

"Irene's photograph!" he cried. "Certainly, if you wish it."

"I thank your Majesty. Then there is no more to be done in the
matter. I have the honour to wish you a very good-morning." He
bowed, and, turning away without observing the hand which the
King had stretched out to him, he set off in my company for his
chambers.

And that was how a great scandal threatened to affect the kingdom
of Bohemia, and how the best plans of Mr. Sherlock Holmes were
beaten by a woman's wit. He used to make merry over the
cleverness of women, but I have not heard him do it of late. And
when he speaks of Irene Adler, or when he refers to her
photograph, it is always under the honourable title of the woman.



ADVENTURE II. THE RED-HEADED LEAGUE

I had called upon my friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, one day in the
autumn of last year and found him in deep conversation with a
very stout, florid-faced, elderly gentleman with fiery red hair.
With an apology for my intrusion, I was about to withdraw when
Holmes pulled me abruptly into the room and closed the door
behind me.

"You could not possibly have come at a better time, my dear
Watson," he said cordially.

"I was afraid that you were engaged."

"So I am. Very much so."

"Then I can wait in the next room."

"Not at all. This gentleman, Mr. Wilson, has been my partner and
helper in many of my most successful cases, and I have no
doubt that he will be of the utmost use to me in yours also."

The stout gentleman half rose from his chair and gave a bob of
greeting, with a quick little questioning glance from his small
fat-encircled eyes.

"Try the settee," said Holmes, relapsing into his armchair and
putting his fingertips together, as was his custom when in
judicial moods. "I know, my dear Watson, that you share my love
of all that is bizarre and outside the conventions and humdrum
routine of everyday life. You have shown your relish for it by
the enthusiasm which has prompted you to chronicle, and, if you
will excuse my saying so, somewhat to embellish so many of my own
little adventures."

"Your cases have indeed been of the greatest interest to me," I
observed.

"You will remember that I remarked the other day, just before we
went into the very simple problem presented by Miss Mary
Sutherland, that for strange effects and extraordinary
combinations we must go to life itself, which is always far more
daring than any effort of the imagination."

"A proposition which I took the liberty of doubting."

"You did, Doctor, but none the less you must come round to my
view, for otherwise I shall keep on piling fact upon fact on you
until your reason breaks down under them and acknowledges me to
be right. Now, Mr. Jabez Wilson here has been good enough to call
upon me this morning, and to begin a narrative which promises to
be one of the most singular which I have listened to for some
time. You have heard me remark that the strangest and most unique
things are very often connected not with the larger but with the
smaller crimes, and occasionally, indeed, where there is room for
doubt whether any positive crime has been committed. As far as I
have heard it is impossible for me to say whether the present
case is an instance of crime or not, but the course of events is
certainly among the most singular that I have ever listened to.
Perhaps, Mr. Wilson, you would have the great kindness to
recommence your narrative. I ask you not merely because my friend
Dr. Watson has not heard the opening part but also because the
peculiar nature of the story makes me anxious to have every
possible detail from your lips. As a rule, when I have heard some
slight indication of the course of events, I am able to guide
myself by the thousands of other similar cases which occur to my
memory. In the present instance I am forced to admit that the
facts are, to the best of my belief, unique."

The portly client puffed out his chest with an appearance of some
little pride and pulled a dirty and wrinkled newspaper from the
inside pocket of his greatcoat. As he glanced down the
advertisement column, with his head thrust forward and the paper
flattened out upon his knee, I took a good look at the man and
endeavoured, after the fashion of my companion, to read the
indications which might be presented by his dress or appearance.

I did not gain very much, however, by my inspection. Our visitor
bore every mark of being an average commonplace British
tradesman, obese, pompous, and slow. He wore rather baggy grey
shepherd's check trousers, a not over-clean black frock-coat,
unbuttoned in the front, and a drab waistcoat with a heavy brassy
Albert chain, and a square pierced bit of metal dangling down as
an ornament. A frayed top-hat and a faded brown overcoat with a
wrinkled velvet collar lay upon a chair beside him. Altogether,
look as I would, there was nothing remarkable about the man save
his blazing red head, and the expression of extreme chagrin and
discontent upon his features.

Sherlock Holmes' quick eye took in my occupation, and he shook
his head with a smile as he noticed my questioning glances.
"Beyond the obvious facts that he has at some time done manual
labour, that he takes snuff, that he is a Freemason, that he has
been in China, and that he has done a considerable amount of
writing lately, I can deduce nothing else."

Mr. Jabez Wilson started up in his chair, with his forefinger
upon the paper, but his eyes upon my companion.

"How, in the name of good-fortune, did you know all that, Mr.
Holmes?" he asked. "How did you know, for example, that I did
manual labour. It's as true as gospel, for I began as a ship's
carpenter."

"Your hands, my dear sir. Your right hand is quite a size larger
than your left. You have worked with it, and the muscles are more
developed."

"Well, the snuff, then, and the Freemasonry?"

"I won't insult your intelligence by telling you how I read that,
especially as, rather against the strict rules of your order, you
use an arc-and-compass breastpin."

"Ah, of course, I forgot that. But the writing?"

"What else can be indicated by that right cuff so very shiny for
five inches, and the left one with the smooth patch near the
elbow where you rest it upon the desk?"

"Well, but China?"

"The fish that you have tattooed immediately above your right
wrist could only have been done in China. I have made a small
study of tattoo marks and have even contributed to the literature
of the subject. That trick of staining the fishes' scales of a
delicate pink is quite peculiar to China. When, in addition, I
see a Chinese coin hanging from your watch-chain, the matter
becomes even more simple."

Mr. Jabez Wilson laughed heavily. "Well, I never!" said he. "I
thought at first that you had done something clever, but I see
that there was nothing in it, after all."

"I begin to think, Watson," said Holmes, "that I make a mistake
in explaining. 'Omne ignotum pro magnifico,' you know, and my
poor little reputation, such as it is, will suffer shipwreck if I
am so candid. Can you not find the advertisement, Mr. Wilson?"

"Yes, I have got it now," he answered with his thick red finger
planted halfway down the column. "Here it is. This is what began
it all. You just read it for yourself, sir."

I took the paper from him and read as follows:

"TO THE RED-HEADED LEAGUE: On account of the bequest of the late
Ezekiah Hopkins, of Lebanon, Pennsylvania, U. S. A., there is now
another vacancy open which entitles a member of the League to a
salary of 4 pounds a week for purely nominal services. All
red-headed men who are sound in body and mind and above the age
of twenty-one years, are eligible. Apply in person on Monday, at
eleven o'clock, to Duncan Ross, at the offices of the League, 7
Pope's Court, Fleet Street."

"What on earth does this mean?" I ejaculated after I had twice
read over the extraordinary announcement.

Holmes chuckled and wriggled in his chair, as was his habit when
in high spirits. "It is a little off the beaten track, isn't it?"
said he. "And now, Mr. Wilson, off you go at scratch and tell us
all about yourself, your household, and the effect which this
advertisement had upon your fortunes. You will first make a note,
Doctor, of the paper and the date."

"It is The Morning Chronicle of April 27, 1890. Just two months
ago."

"Very good. Now, Mr. Wilson?"

"Well, it is just as I have been telling you, Mr. Sherlock
Holmes," said Jabez Wilson, mopping his forehead; "I have a small
pawnbroker's business at Coburg Square, near the City. It's not a
very large affair, and of late years it has not done more than
just give me a living. I used to be able to keep two assistants,
but now I only keep one; and I would have a job to pay him but
that he is willing to come for half wages so as to learn the
business."

"What is the name of this obliging youth?" asked Sherlock Holmes.

"His name is Vincent Spaulding, and he's not such a youth,
either. It's hard to say his age. I should not wish a smarter
assistant, Mr. Holmes; and I know very well that he could better
himself and earn twice what I am able to give him. But, after
all, if he is satisfied, why should I put ideas in his head?"

"Why, indeed? You seem most fortunate in having an employé who
comes under the full market price. It is not a common experience
among employers in this age. I don't know that your assistant is
not as remarkable as your advertisement."

"Oh, he has his faults, too," said Mr. Wilson. "Never was such a
fellow for photography. Snapping away with a camera when he ought
to be improving his mind, and then diving down into the cellar
like a rabbit into its hole to develop his pictures. That is his
main fault, but on the whole he's a good worker. There's no vice
in him."

"He is still with you, I presume?"

"Yes, sir. He and a girl of fourteen, who does a bit of simple
cooking and keeps the place clean--that's all I have in the
house, for I am a widower and never had any family. We live very
quietly, sir, the three of us; and we keep a roof over our heads
and pay our debts, if we do nothing more.

"The first thing that put us out was that advertisement.
Spaulding, he came down into the office just this day eight
weeks, with this very paper in his hand, and he says:

"'I wish to the Lord, Mr. Wilson, that I was a red-headed man.'

"'Why that?' I asks.

"'Why,' says he, 'here's another vacancy on the League of the
Red-headed Men. It's worth quite a little fortune to any man who
gets it, and I understand that there are more vacancies than
there are men, so that the trustees are at their wits' end what
to do with the money. If my hair would only change colour, here's
a nice little crib all ready for me to step into.'

"'Why, what is it, then?' I asked. You see, Mr. Holmes, I am a
very stay-at-home man, and as my business came to me instead of
my having to go to it, I was often weeks on end without putting
my foot over the door-mat. In that way I didn't know much of what
was going on outside, and I was always glad of a bit of news.

"'Have you never heard of the League of the Red-headed Men?' he
asked with his eyes open.

"'Never.'

"'Why, I wonder at that, for you are eligible yourself for one
of the vacancies.'

"'And what are they worth?' I asked.

"'Oh, merely a couple of hundred a year, but the work is slight,
and it need not interfere very much with one's other
occupations.'

"Well, you can easily think that that made me prick up my ears,
for the business has not been over-good for some years, and an
extra couple of hundred would have been very handy.

"'Tell me all about it,' said I.

"'Well,' said he, showing me the advertisement, 'you can see for
yourself that the League has a vacancy, and there is the address
where you should apply for particulars. As far as I can make out,
the League was founded by an American millionaire, Ezekiah
Hopkins, who was very peculiar in his ways. He was himself
red-headed, and he had a great sympathy for all red-headed men;
so when he died it was found that he had left his enormous
fortune in the hands of trustees, with instructions to apply the
interest to the providing of easy berths to men whose hair is of
that colour. From all I hear it is splendid pay and very little to
do.'

"'But,' said I, 'there would be millions of red-headed men who
would apply.'

"'Not so many as you might think,' he answered. 'You see it is
really confined to Londoners, and to grown men. This American had
started from London when he was young, and he wanted to do the
old town a good turn. Then, again, I have heard it is no use your
applying if your hair is light red, or dark red, or anything but
real bright, blazing, fiery red. Now, if you cared to apply, Mr.
Wilson, you would just walk in; but perhaps it would hardly be
worth your while to put yourself out of the way for the sake of a
few hundred pounds.'

"Now, it is a fact, gentlemen, as you may see for yourselves,
that my hair is of a very full and rich tint, so that it seemed
to me that if there was to be any competition in the matter I
stood as good a chance as any man that I had ever met. Vincent
Spaulding seemed to know so much about it that I thought he might
prove useful, so I just ordered him to put up the shutters for
the day and to come right away with me. He was very willing to
have a holiday, so we shut the business up and started off for
the address that was given us in the advertisement.

"I never hope to see such a sight as that again, Mr. Holmes. From
north, south, east, and west every man who had a shade of red in
his hair had tramped into the city to answer the advertisement.
Fleet Street was choked with red-headed folk, and Pope's Court
looked like a coster's orange barrow. I should not have thought
there were so many in the whole country as were brought together
by that single advertisement. Every shade of colour they
were--straw, lemon, orange, brick, Irish-setter, liver, clay;
but, as Spaulding said, there were not many who had the real
vivid flame-coloured tint. When I saw how many were waiting, I
would have given it up in despair; but Spaulding would not hear
of it. How he did it I could not imagine, but he pushed and
pulled and butted until he got me through the crowd, and right up
to the steps which led to the office. There was a double stream
upon the stair, some going up in hope, and some coming back
dejected; but we wedged in as well as we could and soon found
ourselves in the office."

"Your experience has been a most entertaining one," remarked
Holmes as his client paused and refreshed his memory with a huge
pinch of snuff. "Pray continue your very interesting statement."

"There was nothing in the office but a couple of wooden chairs
and a deal table, behind which sat a small man with a head that
was even redder than mine. He said a few words to each candidate
as he came up, and then he always managed to find some fault in
them which would disqualify them. Getting a vacancy did not seem
to be such a very easy matter, after all. However, when our turn
came the little man was much more favourable to me than to any of
the others, and he closed the door as we entered, so that he
might have a private word with us.

"'This is Mr. Jabez Wilson,' said my assistant, 'and he is
willing to fill a vacancy in the League.'

"'And he is admirably suited for it,' the other answered. 'He has
every requirement. I cannot recall when I have seen anything so
fine.' He took a step backward, cocked his head on one side, and
gazed at my hair until I felt quite bashful. Then suddenly he
plunged forward, wrung my hand, and congratulated me warmly on my
success.

"'It would be injustice to hesitate,' said he. 'You will,
however, I am sure, excuse me for taking an obvious precaution.'
With that he seized my hair in both his hands, and tugged until I
yelled with the pain. 'There is water in your eyes,' said he as
he released me. 'I perceive that all is as it should be. But we
have to be careful, for we have twice been deceived by wigs and
once by paint. I could tell you tales of cobbler's wax which
would disgust you with human nature.' He stepped over to the
window and shouted through it at the top of his voice that the
vacancy was filled. A groan of disappointment came up from below,
and the folk all trooped away in different directions until there
was not a red-head to be seen except my own and that of the
manager.

"'My name,' said he, 'is Mr. Duncan Ross, and I am myself one of
the pensioners upon the fund left by our noble benefactor. Are
you a married man, Mr. Wilson? Have you a family?'

"I answered that I had not.

"His face fell immediately.

"'Dear me!' he said gravely, 'that is very serious indeed! I am
sorry to hear you say that. The fund was, of course, for the
propagation and spread of the red-heads as well as for their
maintenance. It is exceedingly unfortunate that you should be a
bachelor.'

"My face lengthened at this, Mr. Holmes, for I thought that I was
not to have the vacancy after all; but after thinking it over for
a few minutes he said that it would be all right.

"'In the case of another,' said he, 'the objection might be
fatal, but we must stretch a point in favour of a man with such a
head of hair as yours. When shall you be able to enter upon your
new duties?'

"'Well, it is a little awkward, for I have a business already,'
said I.

"'Oh, never mind about that, Mr. Wilson!' said Vincent Spaulding.
'I should be able to look after that for you.'

"'What would be the hours?' I asked.

"'Ten to two.'

"Now a pawnbroker's business is mostly done of an evening, Mr.
Holmes, especially Thursday and Friday evening, which is just
before pay-day; so it would suit me very well to earn a little in
the mornings. Besides, I knew that my assistant was a good man,
and that he would see to anything that turned up.

"'That would suit me very well,' said I. 'And the pay?'

"'Is 4 pounds a week.'

"'And the work?'

"'Is purely nominal.'

"'What do you call purely nominal?'

"'Well, you have to be in the office, or at least in the
building, the whole time. If you leave, you forfeit your whole
position forever. The will is very clear upon that point. You
don't comply with the conditions if you budge from the office
during that time.'

"'It's only four hours a day, and I should not think of leaving,'
said I.

"'No excuse will avail,' said Mr. Duncan Ross; 'neither sickness
nor business nor anything else. There you must stay, or you lose
your billet.'

"'And the work?'

"'Is to copy out the "Encyclopaedia Britannica." There is the first
volume of it in that press. You must find your own ink, pens, and
blotting-paper, but we provide this table and chair. Will you be
ready to-morrow?'

"'Certainly,' I answered.

"'Then, good-bye, Mr. Jabez Wilson, and let me congratulate you
once more on the important position which you have been fortunate
enough to gain.' He bowed me out of the room and I went home with
my assistant, hardly knowing what to say or do, I was so pleased
at my own good fortune.

"Well, I thought over the matter all day, and by evening I was in
low spirits again; for I had quite persuaded myself that the
whole affair must be some great hoax or fraud, though what its
object might be I could not imagine. It seemed altogether past
belief that anyone could make such a will, or that they would pay
such a sum for doing anything so simple as copying out the
'Encyclopaedia Britannica.' Vincent Spaulding did what he could to
cheer me up, but by bedtime I had reasoned myself out of the
whole thing. However, in the morning I determined to have a look
at it anyhow, so I bought a penny bottle of ink, and with a
quill-pen, and seven sheets of foolscap paper, I started off for
Pope's Court.

"Well, to my surprise and delight, everything was as right as
possible. The table was set out ready for me, and Mr. Duncan Ross
was there to see that I got fairly to work. He started me off
upon the letter A, and then he left me; but he would drop in from
time to time to see that all was right with me. At two o'clock he
bade me good-day, complimented me upon the amount that I had
written, and locked the door of the office after me.

"This went on day after day, Mr. Holmes, and on Saturday the
manager came in and planked down four golden sovereigns for my
week's work. It was the same next week, and the same the week
after. Every morning I was there at ten, and every afternoon I
left at two. By degrees Mr. Duncan Ross took to coming in only
once of a morning, and then, after a time, he did not come in at
all. Still, of course, I never dared to leave the room for an
instant, for I was not sure when he might come, and the billet
was such a good one, and suited me so well, that I would not risk
the loss of it.

"Eight weeks passed away like this, and I had written about
Abbots and Archery and Armour and Architecture and Attica, and
hoped with diligence that I might get on to the B's before very
long. It cost me something in foolscap, and I had pretty nearly
filled a shelf with my writings. And then suddenly the whole
business came to an end."

"To an end?"

"Yes, sir. And no later than this morning. I went to my work as
usual at ten o'clock, but the door was shut and locked, with a
little square of cardboard hammered on to the middle of the
panel with a tack. Here it is, and you can read for yourself."

He held up a piece of white cardboard about the size of a sheet
of note-paper. It read in this fashion:

                  THE RED-HEADED LEAGUE

                           IS

                        DISSOLVED.

                     October 9, 1890.

Sherlock Holmes and I surveyed this curt announcement and the
rueful face behind it, until the comical side of the affair so
completely overtopped every other consideration that we both
burst out into a roar of laughter.

"I cannot see that there is anything very funny," cried our
client, flushing up to the roots of his flaming head. "If you can
do nothing better than laugh at me, I can go elsewhere."

"No, no," cried Holmes, shoving him back into the chair from
which he had half risen. "I really wouldn't miss your case for
the world. It is most refreshingly unusual. But there is, if you
will excuse my saying so, something just a little funny about it.
Pray what steps did you take when you found the card upon the
door?"

"I was staggered, sir. I did not know what to do. Then I called
at the offices round, but none of them seemed to know anything
about it. Finally, I went to the landlord, who is an accountant
living on the ground-floor, and I asked him if he could tell me
what had become of the Red-headed League. He said that he had
never heard of any such body. Then I asked him who Mr. Duncan
Ross was. He answered that the name was new to him.

"'Well,' said I, 'the gentleman at No. 4.'

"'What, the red-headed man?'

"'Yes.'

"'Oh,' said he, 'his name was William Morris. He was a solicitor
and was using my room as a temporary convenience until his new
premises were ready. He moved out yesterday.'

"'Where could I find him?'

"'Oh, at his new offices. He did tell me the address. Yes, 17
King Edward Street, near St. Paul's.'

"I started off, Mr. Holmes, but when I got to that address it was
a manufactory of artificial knee-caps, and no one in it had ever
heard of either Mr. William Morris or Mr. Duncan Ross."

"And what did you do then?" asked Holmes.

"I went home to Saxe-Coburg Square, and I took the advice of my
assistant. But he could not help me in any way. He could only say
that if I waited I should hear by post. But that was not quite
good enough, Mr. Holmes. I did not wish to lose such a place
without a struggle, so, as I had heard that you were good enough
to give advice to poor folk who were in need of it, I came right
away to you."

"And you did very wisely," said Holmes. "Your case is an
exceedingly remarkable one, and I shall be happy to look into it.
From what you have told me I think that it is possible that
graver issues hang from it than might at first sight appear."

"Grave enough!" said Mr. Jabez Wilson. "Why, I have lost four
pound a week."

"As far as you are personally concerned," remarked Holmes, "I do
not see that you have any grievance against this extraordinary
league. On the contrary, you are, as I understand, richer by some
30 pounds, to say nothing of the minute knowledge which you have
gained on every subject which comes under the letter A. You have
lost nothing by them."

"No, sir. But I want to find out about them, and who they are,
and what their object was in playing this prank--if it was a
prank--upon me. It was a pretty expensive joke for them, for it
cost them two and thirty pounds."

"We shall endeavour to clear up these points for you. And, first,
one or two questions, Mr. Wilson. This assistant of yours who
first called your attention to the advertisement--how long had he
been with you?"

"About a month then."

"How did he come?"

"In answer to an advertisement."

"Was he the only applicant?"

"No, I had a dozen."

"Why did you pick him?"

"Because he was handy and would come cheap."

"At half-wages, in fact."

"Yes."

"What is he like, this Vincent Spaulding?"

"Small, stout-built, very quick in his ways, no hair on his face,
though he's not short of thirty. Has a white splash of acid upon
his forehead."

Holmes sat up in his chair in considerable excitement. "I thought
as much," said he. "Have you ever observed that his ears are
pierced for earrings?"

"Yes, sir. He told me that a gipsy had done it for him when he
was a lad."

"Hum!" said Holmes, sinking back in deep thought. "He is still
with you?"

"Oh, yes, sir; I have only just left him."

"And has your business been attended to in your absence?"

"Nothing to complain of, sir. There's never very much to do of a
morning."

"That will do, Mr. Wilson. I shall be happy to give you an
opinion upon the subject in the course of a day or two. To-day is
Saturday, and I hope that by Monday we may come to a conclusion."

"Well, Watson," said Holmes when our visitor had left us, "what
do you make of it all?"

"I make nothing of it," I answered frankly. "It is a most
mysterious business."

"As a rule," said Holmes, "the more bizarre a thing is the less
mysterious it proves to be. It is your commonplace, featureless
crimes which are really puzzling, just as a commonplace face is
the most difficult to identify. But I must be prompt over this
matter."

"What are you going to do, then?" I asked.

"To smoke," he answered. "It is quite a three pipe problem, and I
beg that you won't speak to me for fifty minutes." He curled
himself up in his chair, with his thin knees drawn up to his
hawk-like nose, and there he sat with his eyes closed and his
black clay pipe thrusting out like the bill of some strange bird.
I had come to the conclusion that he had dropped asleep, and
indeed was nodding myself, when he suddenly sprang out of his
chair with the gesture of a man who has made up his mind and put
his pipe down upon the mantelpiece.

"Sarasate plays at the St. James's Hall this afternoon," he
remarked. "What do you think, Watson? Could your patients spare
you for a few hours?"

"I have nothing to do to-day. My practice is never very
absorbing."

"Then put on your hat and come. I am going through the City
first, and we can have some lunch on the way. I observe that
there is a good deal of German music on the programme, which is
rather more to my taste than Italian or French. It is
introspective, and I want to introspect. Come along!"

We travelled by the Underground as far as Aldersgate; and a short
walk took us to Saxe-Coburg Square, the scene of the singular
story which we had listened to in the morning. It was a poky,
little, shabby-genteel place, where four lines of dingy
two-storied brick houses looked out into a small railed-in
enclosure, where a lawn of weedy grass and a few clumps of faded
laurel-bushes made a hard fight against a smoke-laden and
uncongenial atmosphere. Three gilt balls and a brown board with
"JABEZ WILSON" in white letters, upon a corner house, announced
the place where our red-headed client carried on his business.
Sherlock Holmes stopped in front of it with his head on one side
and looked it all over, with his eyes shining brightly between
puckered lids. Then he walked slowly up the street, and then down
again to the corner, still looking keenly at the houses. Finally
he returned to the pawnbroker's, and, having thumped vigorously
upon the pavement with his stick two or three times, he went up
to the door and knocked. It was instantly opened by a
bright-looking, clean-shaven young fellow, who asked him to step
in.

"Thank you," said Holmes, "I only wished to ask you how you would
go from here to the Strand."

"Third right, fourth left," answered the assistant promptly,
closing the door.

"Smart fellow, that," observed Holmes as we walked away. "He is,
in my judgment, the fourth smartest man in London, and for daring
I am not sure that he has not a claim to be third. I have known
something of him before."

"Evidently," said I, "Mr. Wilson's assistant counts for a good
deal in this mystery of the Red-headed League. I am sure that you
inquired your way merely in order that you might see him."

"Not him."

"What then?"

"The knees of his trousers."

"And what did you see?"

"What I expected to see."

"Why did you beat the pavement?"

"My dear doctor, this is a time for observation, not for talk. We
are spies in an enemy's country. We know something of Saxe-Coburg
Square. Let us now explore the parts which lie behind it."

The road in which we found ourselves as we turned round the
corner from the retired Saxe-Coburg Square presented as great a
contrast to it as the front of a picture does to the back. It was
one of the main arteries which conveyed the traffic of the City
to the north and west. The roadway was blocked with the immense
stream of commerce flowing in a double tide inward and outward,
while the footpaths were black with the hurrying swarm of
pedestrians. It was difficult to realise as we looked at the line
of fine shops and stately business premises that they really
abutted on the other side upon the faded and stagnant square
which we had just quitted.

"Let me see," said Holmes, standing at the corner and glancing
along the line, "I should like just to remember the order of the
houses here. It is a hobby of mine to have an exact knowledge of
London. There is Mortimer's, the tobacconist, the little
newspaper shop, the Coburg branch of the City and Suburban Bank,
the Vegetarian Restaurant, and McFarlane's carriage-building
depot. That carries us right on to the other block. And now,
Doctor, we've done our work, so it's time we had some play. A
sandwich and a cup of coffee, and then off to violin-land, where
all is sweetness and delicacy and harmony, and there are no
red-headed clients to vex us with their conundrums."

My friend was an enthusiastic musician, being himself not only a
very capable performer but a composer of no ordinary merit. All
the afternoon he sat in the stalls wrapped in the most perfect
happiness, gently waving his long, thin fingers in time to the
music, while his gently smiling face and his languid, dreamy eyes
were as unlike those of Holmes the sleuth-hound, Holmes the
relentless, keen-witted, ready-handed criminal agent, as it was
possible to conceive. In his singular character the dual nature
alternately asserted itself, and his extreme exactness and
astuteness represented, as I have often thought, the reaction
against the poetic and contemplative mood which occasionally
predominated in him. The swing of his nature took him from
extreme languor to devouring energy; and, as I knew well, he was
never so truly formidable as when, for days on end, he had been
lounging in his armchair amid his improvisations and his
black-letter editions. Then it was that the lust of the chase
would suddenly come upon him, and that his brilliant reasoning
power would rise to the level of intuition, until those who were
unacquainted with his methods would look askance at him as on a
man whose knowledge was not that of other mortals. When I saw him
that afternoon so enwrapped in the music at St. James's Hall I
felt that an evil time might be coming upon those whom he had set
himself to hunt down.

"You want to go home, no doubt, Doctor," he remarked as we
emerged.

"Yes, it would be as well."

"And I have some business to do which will take some hours. This
business at Coburg Square is serious."

"Why serious?"

"A considerable crime is in contemplation. I have every reason to
believe that we shall be in time to stop it. But to-day being
Saturday rather complicates matters. I shall want your help
to-night."

"At what time?"

"Ten will be early enough."

"I shall be at Baker Street at ten."

"Very well. And, I say, Doctor, there may be some little danger,
so kindly put your army revolver in your pocket." He waved his
hand, turned on his heel, and disappeared in an instant among the
crowd.

I trust that I am not more dense than my neighbours, but I was
always oppressed with a sense of my own stupidity in my dealings
with Sherlock Holmes. Here I had heard what he had heard, I had
seen what he had seen, and yet from his words it was evident that
he saw clearly not only what had happened but what was about to
happen, while to me the whole business was still confused and
grotesque. As I drove home to my house in Kensington I thought
over it all, from the extraordinary story of the red-headed
copier of the "Encyclopaedia" down to the visit to Saxe-Coburg
Square, and the ominous words with which he had parted from me.
What was this nocturnal expedition, and why should I go armed?
Where were we going, and what were we to do? I had the hint from
Holmes that this smooth-faced pawnbroker's assistant was a
formidable man--a man who might play a deep game. I tried to
puzzle it out, but gave it up in despair and set the matter aside
until night should bring an explanation.

It was a quarter-past nine when I started from home and made my
way across the Park, and so through Oxford Street to Baker
Street. Two hansoms were standing at the door, and as I entered
the passage I heard the sound of voices from above. On entering
his room I found Holmes in animated conversation with two men,
one of whom I recognised as Peter Jones, the official police
agent, while the other was a long, thin, sad-faced man, with a
very shiny hat and oppressively respectable frock-coat.

"Ha! Our party is complete," said Holmes, buttoning up his
pea-jacket and taking his heavy hunting crop from the rack.
"Watson, I think you know Mr. Jones, of Scotland Yard? Let me
introduce you to Mr. Merryweather, who is to be our companion in
to-night's adventure."

"We're hunting in couples again, Doctor, you see," said Jones in
his consequential way. "Our friend here is a wonderful man for
starting a chase. All he wants is an old dog to help him to do
the running down."

"I hope a wild goose may not prove to be the end of our chase,"
observed Mr. Merryweather gloomily.

"You may place considerable confidence in Mr. Holmes, sir," said
the police agent loftily. "He has his own little methods, which
are, if he won't mind my saying so, just a little too theoretical
and fantastic, but he has the makings of a detective in him. It
is not too much to say that once or twice, as in that business of
the Sholto murder and the Agra treasure, he has been more nearly
correct than the official force."

"Oh, if you say so, Mr. Jones, it is all right," said the
stranger with deference. "Still, I confess that I miss my rubber.
It is the first Saturday night for seven-and-twenty years that I
have not had my rubber."

"I think you will find," said Sherlock Holmes, "that you will
play for a higher stake to-night than you have ever done yet, and
that the play will be more exciting. For you, Mr. Merryweather,
the stake will be some 30,000 pounds; and for you, Jones, it will
be the man upon whom you wish to lay your hands."

"John Clay, the murderer, thief, smasher, and forger. He's a
young man, Mr. Merryweather, but he is at the head of his
profession, and I would rather have my bracelets on him than on
any criminal in London. He's a remarkable man, is young John
Clay. His grandfather was a royal duke, and he himself has been
to Eton and Oxford. His brain is as cunning as his fingers, and
though we meet signs of him at every turn, we never know where to
find the man himself. He'll crack a crib in Scotland one week,
and be raising money to build an orphanage in Cornwall the next.
I've been on his track for years and have never set eyes on him
yet."

"I hope that I may have the pleasure of introducing you to-night.
I've had one or two little turns also with Mr. John Clay, and I
agree with you that he is at the head of his profession. It is
past ten, however, and quite time that we started. If you two
will take the first hansom, Watson and I will follow in the
second."

Sherlock Holmes was not very communicative during the long drive
and lay back in the cab humming the tunes which he had heard in
the afternoon. We rattled through an endless labyrinth of gas-lit
streets until we emerged into Farrington Street.

"We are close there now," my friend remarked. "This fellow
Merryweather is a bank director, and personally interested in the
matter. I thought it as well to have Jones with us also. He is
not a bad fellow, though an absolute imbecile in his profession.
He has one positive virtue. He is as brave as a bulldog and as
tenacious as a lobster if he gets his claws upon anyone. Here we
are, and they are waiting for us."

We had reached the same crowded thoroughfare in which we had
found ourselves in the morning. Our cabs were dismissed, and,
following the guidance of Mr. Merryweather, we passed down a
narrow passage and through a side door, which he opened for us.
Within there was a small corridor, which ended in a very massive
iron gate. This also was opened, and led down a flight of winding
stone steps, which terminated at another formidable gate. Mr.
Merryweather stopped to light a lantern, and then conducted us
down a dark, earth-smelling passage, and so, after opening a
third door, into a huge vault or cellar, which was piled all
round with crates and massive boxes.

"You are not very vulnerable from above," Holmes remarked as he
held up the lantern and gazed about him.

"Nor from below," said Mr. Merryweather, striking his stick upon
the flags which lined the floor. "Why, dear me, it sounds quite
hollow!" he remarked, looking up in surprise.

"I must really ask you to be a little more quiet!" said Holmes
severely. "You have already imperilled the whole success of our
expedition. Might I beg that you would have the goodness to sit
down upon one of those boxes, and not to interfere?"

The solemn Mr. Merryweather perched himself upon a crate, with a
very injured expression upon his face, while Holmes fell upon his
knees upon the floor and, with the lantern and a magnifying lens,
began to examine minutely the cracks between the stones. A few
seconds sufficed to satisfy him, for he sprang to his feet again
and put his glass in his pocket.

"We have at least an hour before us," he remarked, "for they can
hardly take any steps until the good pawnbroker is safely in bed.
Then they will not lose a minute, for the sooner they do their
work the longer time they will have for their escape. We are at
present, Doctor--as no doubt you have divined--in the cellar of
the City branch of one of the principal London banks. Mr.
Merryweather is the chairman of directors, and he will explain to
you that there are reasons why the more daring criminals of
London should take a considerable interest in this cellar at
present."

"It is our French gold," whispered the director. "We have had
several warnings that an attempt might be made upon it."

"Your French gold?"

"Yes. We had occasion some months ago to strengthen our resources
and borrowed for that purpose 30,000 napoleons from the Bank of
France. It has become known that we have never had occasion to
unpack the money, and that it is still lying in our cellar. The
crate upon which I sit contains 2,000 napoleons packed between
layers of lead foil. Our reserve of bullion is much larger at
present than is usually kept in a single branch office, and the
directors have had misgivings upon the subject."

"Which were very well justified," observed Holmes. "And now it is
time that we arranged our little plans. I expect that within an
hour matters will come to a head. In the meantime Mr.
Merryweather, we must put the screen over that dark lantern."

"And sit in the dark?"

"I am afraid so. I had brought a pack of cards in my pocket, and
I thought that, as we were a partie carrée, you might have your
rubber after all. But I see that the enemy's preparations have
gone so far that we cannot risk the presence of a light. And,
first of all, we must choose our positions. These are daring men,
and though we shall take them at a disadvantage, they may do us
some harm unless we are careful. I shall stand behind this crate,
and do you conceal yourselves behind those. Then, when I flash a
light upon them, close in swiftly. If they fire, Watson, have no
compunction about shooting them down."

I placed my revolver, cocked, upon the top of the wooden case
behind which I crouched. Holmes shot the slide across the front
of his lantern and left us in pitch darkness--such an absolute
darkness as I have never before experienced. The smell of hot
metal remained to assure us that the light was still there, ready
to flash out at a moment's notice. To me, with my nerves worked
up to a pitch of expectancy, there was something depressing and
subduing in the sudden gloom, and in the cold dank air of the
vault.

"They have but one retreat," whispered Holmes. "That is back
through the house into Saxe-Coburg Square. I hope that you have
done what I asked you, Jones?"

"I have an inspector and two officers waiting at the front door."

"Then we have stopped all the holes. And now we must be silent
and wait."

What a time it seemed! From comparing notes afterwards it was but
an hour and a quarter, yet it appeared to me that the night must
have almost gone and the dawn be breaking above us. My limbs
were weary and stiff, for I feared to change my position; yet my
nerves were worked up to the highest pitch of tension, and my
hearing was so acute that I could not only hear the gentle
breathing of my companions, but I could distinguish the deeper,
heavier in-breath of the bulky Jones from the thin, sighing note
of the bank director. From my position I could look over the case
in the direction of the floor. Suddenly my eyes caught the glint
of a light.

At first it was but a lurid spark upon the stone pavement. Then
it lengthened out until it became a yellow line, and then,
without any warning or sound, a gash seemed to open and a hand
appeared, a white, almost womanly hand, which felt about in the
centre of the little area of light. For a minute or more the
hand, with its writhing fingers, protruded out of the floor. Then
it was withdrawn as suddenly as it appeared, and all was dark
again save the single lurid spark which marked a chink between
the stones.

Its disappearance, however, was but momentary. With a rending,
tearing sound, one of the broad, white stones turned over upon
its side and left a square, gaping hole, through which streamed
the light of a lantern. Over the edge there peeped a clean-cut,
boyish face, which looked keenly about it, and then, with a hand
on either side of the aperture, drew itself shoulder-high and
waist-high, until one knee rested upon the edge. In another
instant he stood at the side of the hole and was hauling after
him a companion, lithe and small like himself, with a pale face
and a shock of very red hair.

"It's all clear," he whispered. "Have you the chisel and the
bags? Great Scott! Jump, Archie, jump, and I'll swing for it!"

Sherlock Holmes had sprung out and seized the intruder by the
collar. The other dived down the hole, and I heard the sound of
rending cloth as Jones clutched at his skirts. The light flashed
upon the barrel of a revolver, but Holmes' hunting crop came
down on the man's wrist, and the pistol clinked upon the stone
floor.

"It's no use, John Clay," said Holmes blandly. "You have no
chance at all."

"So I see," the other answered with the utmost coolness. "I fancy
that my pal is all right, though I see you have got his
coat-tails."

"There are three men waiting for him at the door," said Holmes.

"Oh, indeed! You seem to have done the thing very completely. I
must compliment you."

"And I you," Holmes answered. "Your red-headed idea was very new
and effective."

"You'll see your pal again presently," said Jones. "He's quicker
at climbing down holes than I am. Just hold out while I fix the
derbies."

"I beg that you will not touch me with your filthy hands,"
remarked our prisoner as the handcuffs clattered upon his wrists.
"You may not be aware that I have royal blood in my veins. Have
the goodness, also, when you address me always to say 'sir' and
'please.'"

"All right," said Jones with a stare and a snigger. "Well, would
you please, sir, march upstairs, where we can get a cab to carry
your Highness to the police-station?"

"That is better," said John Clay serenely. He made a sweeping bow
to the three of us and walked quietly off in the custody of the
detective.

"Really, Mr. Holmes," said Mr. Merryweather as we followed them
from the cellar, "I do not know how the bank can thank you or
repay you. There is no doubt that you have detected and defeated
in the most complete manner one of the most determined attempts
at bank robbery that have ever come within my experience."

"I have had one or two little scores of my own to settle with Mr.
John Clay," said Holmes. "I have been at some small expense over
this matter, which I shall expect the bank to refund, but beyond
that I am amply repaid by having had an experience which is in
many ways unique, and by hearing the very remarkable narrative of
the Red-headed League."


"You see, Watson," he explained in the early hours of the morning
as we sat over a glass of whisky and soda in Baker Street, "it
was perfectly obvious from the first that the only possible
object of this rather fantastic business of the advertisement of
the League, and the copying of the 'Encyclopaedia,' must be to get
this not over-bright pawnbroker out of the way for a number of
hours every day. It was a curious way of managing it, but,
really, it would be difficult to suggest a better. The method was
no doubt suggested to Clay's ingenious mind by the colour of his
accomplice's hair. The 4 pounds a week was a lure which must draw
him, and what was it to them, who were playing for thousands?
They put in the advertisement, one rogue has the temporary
office, the other rogue incites the man to apply for it, and
together they manage to secure his absence every morning in the
week. From the time that I heard of the assistant having come for
half wages, it was obvious to me that he had some strong motive
for securing the situation."

"But how could you guess what the motive was?"

"Had there been women in the house, I should have suspected a
mere vulgar intrigue. That, however, was out of the question. The
man's business was a small one, and there was nothing in his
house which could account for such elaborate preparations, and
such an expenditure as they were at. It must, then, be something
out of the house. What could it be? I thought of the assistant's
fondness for photography, and his trick of vanishing into the
cellar. The cellar! There was the end of this tangled clue. Then
I made inquiries as to this mysterious assistant and found that I
had to deal with one of the coolest and most daring criminals in
London. He was doing something in the cellar--something which
took many hours a day for months on end. What could it be, once
more? I could think of nothing save that he was running a tunnel
to some other building.

"So far I had got when we went to visit the scene of action. I
surprised you by beating upon the pavement with my stick. I was
ascertaining whether the cellar stretched out in front or behind.
It was not in front. Then I rang the bell, and, as I hoped, the
assistant answered it. We have had some skirmishes, but we had
never set eyes upon each other before. I hardly looked at his
face. His knees were what I wished to see. You must yourself have
remarked how worn, wrinkled, and stained they were. They spoke of
those hours of burrowing. The only remaining point was what they
were burrowing for. I walked round the corner, saw the City and
Suburban Bank abutted on our friend's premises, and felt that I
had solved my problem. When you drove home after the concert I
called upon Scotland Yard and upon the chairman of the bank
directors, with the result that you have seen."

"And how could you tell that they would make their attempt
to-night?" I asked.

"Well, when they closed their League offices that was a sign that
they cared no longer about Mr. Jabez Wilson's presence--in other
words, that they had completed their tunnel. But it was essential
that they should use it soon, as it might be discovered, or the
bullion might be removed. Saturday would suit them better than
any other day, as it would give them two days for their escape.
For all these reasons I expected them to come to-night."

"You reasoned it out beautifully," I exclaimed in unfeigned
admiration. "It is so long a chain, and yet every link rings
true."

"It saved me from ennui," he answered, yawning. "Alas! I already
feel it closing in upon me. My life is spent in one long effort
to escape from the commonplaces of existence. These little
problems help me to do so."

"And you are a benefactor of the race," said I.

He shrugged his shoulders. "Well, perhaps, after all, it is of
some little use," he remarked. "'L'homme c'est rien--l'oeuvre
c'est tout,' as Gustave Flaubert wrote to George Sand."



ADVENTURE III. A CASE OF IDENTITY

"My dear fellow," said Sherlock Holmes as we sat on either side
of the fire in his lodgings at Baker Street, "life is infinitely
stranger than anything which the mind of man could invent. We
would not dare to conceive the things which are really mere
commonplaces of existence. If we could fly out of that window
hand in hand, hover over this great city, gently remove the
roofs, and peep in at the queer things which are going on, the
strange coincidences, the plannings, the cross-purposes, the
wonderful chains of events, working through generations, and
leading to the most outré results, it would make all fiction with
its conventionalities and foreseen conclusions most stale and
unprofitable."

"And yet I am not convinced of it," I answered. "The cases which
come to light in the papers are, as a rule, bald enough, and
vulgar enough. We have in our police reports realism pushed to
its extreme limits, and yet the result is, it must be confessed,
neither fascinating nor artistic."

"A certain selection and discretion must be used in producing a
realistic effect," remarked Holmes. "This is wanting in the
police report, where more stress is laid, perhaps, upon the
platitudes of the magistrate than upon the details, which to an
observer contain the vital essence of the whole matter. Depend
upon it, there is nothing so unnatural as the commonplace."

I smiled and shook my head. "I can quite understand your thinking
so," I said. "Of course, in your position of unofficial adviser
and helper to everybody who is absolutely puzzled, throughout
three continents, you are brought in contact with all that is
strange and bizarre. But here"--I picked up the morning paper
from the ground--"let us put it to a practical test. Here is the
first heading upon which I come. 'A husband's cruelty to his
wife.' There is half a column of print, but I know without
reading it that it is all perfectly familiar to me. There is, of
course, the other woman, the drink, the push, the blow, the
bruise, the sympathetic sister or landlady. The crudest of
writers could invent nothing more crude."

"Indeed, your example is an unfortunate one for your argument,"
said Holmes, taking the paper and glancing his eye down it. "This
is the Dundas separation case, and, as it happens, I was engaged
in clearing up some small points in connection with it. The
husband was a teetotaler, there was no other woman, and the
conduct complained of was that he had drifted into the habit of
winding up every meal by taking out his false teeth and hurling
them at his wife, which, you will allow, is not an action likely
to occur to the imagination of the average story-teller. Take a
pinch of snuff, Doctor, and acknowledge that I have scored over
you in your example."

He held out his snuffbox of old gold, with a great amethyst in
the centre of the lid. Its splendour was in such contrast to his
homely ways and simple life that I could not help commenting upon
it.

"Ah," said he, "I forgot that I had not seen you for some weeks.
It is a little souvenir from the King of Bohemia in return for my
assistance in the case of the Irene Adler papers."

"And the ring?" I asked, glancing at a remarkable brilliant which
sparkled upon his finger.

"It was from the reigning family of Holland, though the matter in
which I served them was of such delicacy that I cannot confide it
even to you, who have been good enough to chronicle one or two of
my little problems."

"And have you any on hand just now?" I asked with interest.

"Some ten or twelve, but none which present any feature of
interest. They are important, you understand, without being
interesting. Indeed, I have found that it is usually in
unimportant matters that there is a field for the observation,
and for the quick analysis of cause and effect which gives the
charm to an investigation. The larger crimes are apt to be the
simpler, for the bigger the crime the more obvious, as a rule, is
the motive. In these cases, save for one rather intricate matter
which has been referred to me from Marseilles, there is nothing
which presents any features of interest. It is possible, however,
that I may have something better before very many minutes are
over, for this is one of my clients, or I am much mistaken."

He had risen from his chair and was standing between the parted
blinds gazing down into the dull neutral-tinted London street.
Looking over his shoulder, I saw that on the pavement opposite
there stood a large woman with a heavy fur boa round her neck,
and a large curling red feather in a broad-brimmed hat which was
tilted in a coquettish Duchess of Devonshire fashion over her
ear. From under this great panoply she peeped up in a nervous,
hesitating fashion at our windows, while her body oscillated
backward and forward, and her fingers fidgeted with her glove
buttons. Suddenly, with a plunge, as of the swimmer who leaves
the bank, she hurried across the road, and we heard the sharp
clang of the bell.

"I have seen those symptoms before," said Holmes, throwing his
cigarette into the fire. "Oscillation upon the pavement always
means an affaire de coeur. She would like advice, but is not sure
that the matter is not too delicate for communication. And yet
even here we may discriminate. When a woman has been seriously
wronged by a man she no longer oscillates, and the usual symptom
is a broken bell wire. Here we may take it that there is a love
matter, but that the maiden is not so much angry as perplexed, or
grieved. But here she comes in person to resolve our doubts."

As he spoke there was a tap at the door, and the boy in buttons
entered to announce Miss Mary Sutherland, while the lady herself
loomed behind his small black figure like a full-sailed
merchant-man behind a tiny pilot boat. Sherlock Holmes welcomed
her with the easy courtesy for which he was remarkable, and,
having closed the door and bowed her into an armchair, he looked
her over in the minute and yet abstracted fashion which was
peculiar to him.

"Do you not find," he said, "that with your short sight it is a
little trying to do so much typewriting?"

"I did at first," she answered, "but now I know where the letters
are without looking." Then, suddenly realising the full purport
of his words, she gave a violent start and looked up, with fear
and astonishment upon her broad, good-humoured face. "You've
heard about me, Mr. Holmes," she cried, "else how could you know
all that?"

"Never mind," said Holmes, laughing; "it is my business to know
things. Perhaps I have trained myself to see what others
overlook. If not, why should you come to consult me?"

"I came to you, sir, because I heard of you from Mrs. Etherege,
whose husband you found so easy when the police and everyone had
given him up for dead. Oh, Mr. Holmes, I wish you would do as
much for me. I'm not rich, but still I have a hundred a year in
my own right, besides the little that I make by the machine, and
I would give it all to know what has become of Mr. Hosmer Angel."

"Why did you come away to consult me in such a hurry?" asked
Sherlock Holmes, with his finger-tips together and his eyes to
the ceiling.

Again a startled look came over the somewhat vacuous face of Miss
Mary Sutherland. "Yes, I did bang out of the house," she said,
"for it made me angry to see the easy way in which Mr.
Windibank--that is, my father--took it all. He would not go to
the police, and he would not go to you, and so at last, as he
would do nothing and kept on saying that there was no harm done,
it made me mad, and I just on with my things and came right away
to you."

"Your father," said Holmes, "your stepfather, surely, since the
name is different."

"Yes, my stepfather. I call him father, though it sounds funny,
too, for he is only five years and two months older than myself."

"And your mother is alive?"

"Oh, yes, mother is alive and well. I wasn't best pleased, Mr.
Holmes, when she married again so soon after father's death, and
a man who was nearly fifteen years younger than herself. Father
was a plumber in the Tottenham Court Road, and he left a tidy
business behind him, which mother carried on with Mr. Hardy, the
foreman; but when Mr. Windibank came he made her sell the
business, for he was very superior, being a traveller in wines.
They got 4700 pounds for the goodwill and interest, which wasn't
near as much as father could have got if he had been alive."

I had expected to see Sherlock Holmes impatient under this
rambling and inconsequential narrative, but, on the contrary, he
had listened with the greatest concentration of attention.

"Your own little income," he asked, "does it come out of the
business?"

"Oh, no, sir. It is quite separate and was left me by my uncle
Ned in Auckland. It is in New Zealand stock, paying 4 1/2 per
cent. Two thousand five hundred pounds was the amount, but I can
only touch the interest."

"You interest me extremely," said Holmes. "And since you draw so
large a sum as a hundred a year, with what you earn into the
bargain, you no doubt travel a little and indulge yourself in
every way. I believe that a single lady can get on very nicely
upon an income of about 60 pounds."

"I could do with much less than that, Mr. Holmes, but you
understand that as long as I live at home I don't wish to be a
burden to them, and so they have the use of the money just while
I am staying with them. Of course, that is only just for the
time. Mr. Windibank draws my interest every quarter and pays it
over to mother, and I find that I can do pretty well with what I
earn at typewriting. It brings me twopence a sheet, and I can
often do from fifteen to twenty sheets in a day."

"You have made your position very clear to me," said Holmes.
"This is my friend, Dr. Watson, before whom you can speak as
freely as before myself. Kindly tell us now all about your
connection with Mr. Hosmer Angel."

A flush stole over Miss Sutherland's face, and she picked
nervously at the fringe of her jacket. "I met him first at the
gasfitters' ball," she said. "They used to send father tickets
when he was alive, and then afterwards they remembered us, and
sent them to mother. Mr. Windibank did not wish us to go. He
never did wish us to go anywhere. He would get quite mad if I
wanted so much as to join a Sunday-school treat. But this time I
was set on going, and I would go; for what right had he to
prevent? He said the folk were not fit for us to know, when all
father's friends were to be there. And he said that I had nothing
fit to wear, when I had my purple plush that I had never so much
as taken out of the drawer. At last, when nothing else would do,
he went off to France upon the business of the firm, but we went,
mother and I, with Mr. Hardy, who used to be our foreman, and it
was there I met Mr. Hosmer Angel."

"I suppose," said Holmes, "that when Mr. Windibank came back from
France he was very annoyed at your having gone to the ball."

"Oh, well, he was very good about it. He laughed, I remember, and
shrugged his shoulders, and said there was no use denying
anything to a woman, for she would have her way."

"I see. Then at the gasfitters' ball you met, as I understand, a
gentleman called Mr. Hosmer Angel."

"Yes, sir. I met him that night, and he called next day to ask if
we had got home all safe, and after that we met him--that is to
say, Mr. Holmes, I met him twice for walks, but after that father
came back again, and Mr. Hosmer Angel could not come to the house
any more."

"No?"

"Well, you know father didn't like anything of the sort. He
wouldn't have any visitors if he could help it, and he used to
say that a woman should be happy in her own family circle. But
then, as I used to say to mother, a woman wants her own circle to
begin with, and I had not got mine yet."

"But how about Mr. Hosmer Angel? Did he make no attempt to see
you?"

"Well, father was going off to France again in a week, and Hosmer
wrote and said that it would be safer and better not to see each
other until he had gone. We could write in the meantime, and he
used to write every day. I took the letters in in the morning, so
there was no need for father to know."

"Were you engaged to the gentleman at this time?"

"Oh, yes, Mr. Holmes. We were engaged after the first walk that
we took. Hosmer--Mr. Angel--was a cashier in an office in
Leadenhall Street--and--"

"What office?"

"That's the worst of it, Mr. Holmes, I don't know."

"Where did he live, then?"

"He slept on the premises."

"And you don't know his address?"

"No--except that it was Leadenhall Street."

"Where did you address your letters, then?"

"To the Leadenhall Street Post Office, to be left till called
for. He said that if they were sent to the office he would be
chaffed by all the other clerks about having letters from a lady,
so I offered to typewrite them, like he did his, but he wouldn't
have that, for he said that when I wrote them they seemed to come
from me, but when they were typewritten he always felt that the
machine had come between us. That will just show you how fond he
was of me, Mr. Holmes, and the little things that he would think
of."

"It was most suggestive," said Holmes. "It has long been an axiom
of mine that the little things are infinitely the most important.
Can you remember any other little things about Mr. Hosmer Angel?"

"He was a very shy man, Mr. Holmes. He would rather walk with me
in the evening than in the daylight, for he said that he hated to
be conspicuous. Very retiring and gentlemanly he was. Even his
voice was gentle. He'd had the quinsy and swollen glands when he
was young, he told me, and it had left him with a weak throat,
and a hesitating, whispering fashion of speech. He was always
well dressed, very neat and plain, but his eyes were weak, just
as mine are, and he wore tinted glasses against the glare."

"Well, and what happened when Mr. Windibank, your stepfather,
returned to France?"

"Mr. Hosmer Angel came to the house again and proposed that we
should marry before father came back. He was in dreadful earnest
and made me swear, with my hands on the Testament, that whatever
happened I would always be true to him. Mother said he was quite
right to make me swear, and that it was a sign of his passion.
Mother was all in his favour from the first and was even fonder
of him than I was. Then, when they talked of marrying within the
week, I began to ask about father; but they both said never to
mind about father, but just to tell him afterwards, and mother
said she would make it all right with him. I didn't quite like
that, Mr. Holmes. It seemed funny that I should ask his leave, as
he was only a few years older than me; but I didn't want to do
anything on the sly, so I wrote to father at Bordeaux, where the
company has its French offices, but the letter came back to me on
the very morning of the wedding."

"It missed him, then?"

"Yes, sir; for he had started to England just before it arrived."

"Ha! that was unfortunate. Your wedding was arranged, then, for
the Friday. Was it to be in church?"

"Yes, sir, but very quietly. It was to be at St. Saviour's, near
King's Cross, and we were to have breakfast afterwards at the St.
Pancras Hotel. Hosmer came for us in a hansom, but as there were
two of us he put us both into it and stepped himself into a
four-wheeler, which happened to be the only other cab in the
street. We got to the church first, and when the four-wheeler
drove up we waited for him to step out, but he never did, and
when the cabman got down from the box and looked there was no one
there! The cabman said that he could not imagine what had become
of him, for he had seen him get in with his own eyes. That was
last Friday, Mr. Holmes, and I have never seen or heard anything
since then to throw any light upon what became of him."

"It seems to me that you have been very shamefully treated," said
Holmes.

"Oh, no, sir! He was too good and kind to leave me so. Why, all
the morning he was saying to me that, whatever happened, I was to
be true; and that even if something quite unforeseen occurred to
separate us, I was always to remember that I was pledged to him,
and that he would claim his pledge sooner or later. It seemed
strange talk for a wedding-morning, but what has happened since
gives a meaning to it."

"Most certainly it does. Your own opinion is, then, that some
unforeseen catastrophe has occurred to him?"

"Yes, sir. I believe that he foresaw some danger, or else he
would not have talked so. And then I think that what he foresaw
happened."

"But you have no notion as to what it could have been?"

"None."

"One more question. How did your mother take the matter?"

"She was angry, and said that I was never to speak of the matter
again."

"And your father? Did you tell him?"

"Yes; and he seemed to think, with me, that something had
happened, and that I should hear of Hosmer again. As he said,
what interest could anyone have in bringing me to the doors of
the church, and then leaving me? Now, if he had borrowed my
money, or if he had married me and got my money settled on him,
there might be some reason, but Hosmer was very independent about
money and never would look at a shilling of mine. And yet, what
could have happened? And why could he not write? Oh, it drives me
half-mad to think of it, and I can't sleep a wink at night." She
pulled a little handkerchief out of her muff and began to sob
heavily into it.

"I shall glance into the case for you," said Holmes, rising, "and
I have no doubt that we shall reach some definite result. Let the
weight of the matter rest upon me now, and do not let your mind
dwell upon it further. Above all, try to let Mr. Hosmer Angel
vanish from your memory, as he has done from your life."

"Then you don't think I'll see him again?"

"I fear not."

"Then what has happened to him?"

"You will leave that question in my hands. I should like an
accurate description of him and any letters of his which you can
spare."

"I advertised for him in last Saturday's Chronicle," said she.
"Here is the slip and here are four letters from him."

"Thank you. And your address?"

"No. 31 Lyon Place, Camberwell."

"Mr. Angel's address you never had, I understand. Where is your
father's place of business?"

"He travels for Westhouse & Marbank, the great claret importers
of Fenchurch Street."

"Thank you. You have made your statement very clearly. You will
leave the papers here, and remember the advice which I have given
you. Let the whole incident be a sealed book, and do not allow it
to affect your life."

"You are very kind, Mr. Holmes, but I cannot do that. I shall be
true to Hosmer. He shall find me ready when he comes back."

For all the preposterous hat and the vacuous face, there was
something noble in the simple faith of our visitor which
compelled our respect. She laid her little bundle of papers upon
the table and went her way, with a promise to come again whenever
she might be summoned.

Sherlock Holmes sat silent for a few minutes with his fingertips
still pressed together, his legs stretched out in front of him,
and his gaze directed upward to the ceiling. Then he took down
from the rack the old and oily clay pipe, which was to him as a
counsellor, and, having lit it, he leaned back in his chair, with
the thick blue cloud-wreaths spinning up from him, and a look of
infinite languor in his face.

"Quite an interesting study, that maiden," he observed. "I found
her more interesting than her little problem, which, by the way,
is rather a trite one. You will find parallel cases, if you
consult my index, in Andover in '77, and there was something of
the sort at The Hague last year. Old as is the idea, however,
there were one or two details which were new to me. But the
maiden herself was most instructive."

"You appeared to read a good deal upon her which was quite
invisible to me," I remarked.

"Not invisible but unnoticed, Watson. You did not know where to
look, and so you missed all that was important. I can never bring
you to realise the importance of sleeves, the suggestiveness of
thumb-nails, or the great issues that may hang from a boot-lace.
Now, what did you gather from that woman's appearance? Describe
it."

"Well, she had a slate-coloured, broad-brimmed straw hat, with a
feather of a brickish red. Her jacket was black, with black beads
sewn upon it, and a fringe of little black jet ornaments. Her
dress was brown, rather darker than coffee colour, with a little
purple plush at the neck and sleeves. Her gloves were greyish and
were worn through at the right forefinger. Her boots I didn't
observe. She had small round, hanging gold earrings, and a
general air of being fairly well-to-do in a vulgar, comfortable,
easy-going way."

Sherlock Holmes clapped his hands softly together and chuckled.

"'Pon my word, Watson, you are coming along wonderfully. You have
really done very well indeed. It is true that you have missed
everything of importance, but you have hit upon the method, and
you have a quick eye for colour. Never trust to general
impressions, my boy, but concentrate yourself upon details. My
first glance is always at a woman's sleeve. In a man it is
perhaps better first to take the knee of the trouser. As you
observe, this woman had plush upon her sleeves, which is a most
useful material for showing traces. The double line a little
above the wrist, where the typewritist presses against the table,
was beautifully defined. The sewing-machine, of the hand type,
leaves a similar mark, but only on the left arm, and on the side
of it farthest from the thumb, instead of being right across the
broadest part, as this was. I then glanced at her face, and,
observing the dint of a pince-nez at either side of her nose, I
ventured a remark upon short sight and typewriting, which seemed
to surprise her."

"It surprised me."

"But, surely, it was obvious. I was then much surprised and
interested on glancing down to observe that, though the boots
which she was wearing were not unlike each other, they were
really odd ones; the one having a slightly decorated toe-cap, and
the other a plain one. One was buttoned only in the two lower
buttons out of five, and the other at the first, third, and
fifth. Now, when you see that a young lady, otherwise neatly
dressed, has come away from home with odd boots, half-buttoned,
it is no great deduction to say that she came away in a hurry."

"And what else?" I asked, keenly interested, as I always was, by
my friend's incisive reasoning.

"I noted, in passing, that she had written a note before leaving
home but after being fully dressed. You observed that her right
glove was torn at the forefinger, but you did not apparently see
that both glove and finger were stained with violet ink. She had
written in a hurry and dipped her pen too deep. It must have been
this morning, or the mark would not remain clear upon the finger.
All this is amusing, though rather elementary, but I must go back
to business, Watson. Would you mind reading me the advertised
description of Mr. Hosmer Angel?"

I held the little printed slip to the light.

"Missing," it said, "on the morning of the fourteenth, a gentleman
named Hosmer Angel. About five ft. seven in. in height;
strongly built, sallow complexion, black hair, a little bald in
the centre, bushy, black side-whiskers and moustache; tinted
glasses, slight infirmity of speech. Was dressed, when last seen,
in black frock-coat faced with silk, black waistcoat, gold Albert
chain, and grey Harris tweed trousers, with brown gaiters over
elastic-sided boots. Known to have been employed in an office in
Leadenhall Street. Anybody bringing--"

"That will do," said Holmes. "As to the letters," he continued,
glancing over them, "they are very commonplace. Absolutely no
clue in them to Mr. Angel, save that he quotes Balzac once. There
is one remarkable point, however, which will no doubt strike
you."

"They are typewritten," I remarked.

"Not only that, but the signature is typewritten. Look at the
neat little 'Hosmer Angel' at the bottom. There is a date, you
see, but no superscription except Leadenhall Street, which is
rather vague. The point about the signature is very suggestive--in
fact, we may call it conclusive."

"Of what?"

"My dear fellow, is it possible you do not see how strongly it
bears upon the case?"

"I cannot say that I do unless it were that he wished to be able
to deny his signature if an action for breach of promise were
instituted."

"No, that was not the point. However, I shall write two letters,
which should settle the matter. One is to a firm in the City, the
other is to the young lady's stepfather, Mr. Windibank, asking
him whether he could meet us here at six o'clock tomorrow
evening. It is just as well that we should do business with the
male relatives. And now, Doctor, we can do nothing until the
answers to those letters come, so we may put our little problem
upon the shelf for the interim."

I had had so many reasons to believe in my friend's subtle powers
of reasoning and extraordinary energy in action that I felt that
he must have some solid grounds for the assured and easy
demeanour with which he treated the singular mystery which he had
been called upon to fathom. Once only had I known him to fail, in
the case of the King of Bohemia and of the Irene Adler
photograph; but when I looked back to the weird business of the
Sign of Four, and the extraordinary circumstances connected with
the Study in Scarlet, I felt that it would be a strange tangle
indeed which he could not unravel.

I left him then, still puffing at his black clay pipe, with the
conviction that when I came again on the next evening I would
find that he held in his hands all the clues which would lead up
to the identity of the disappearing bridegroom of Miss Mary
Sutherland.

A professional case of great gravity was engaging my own
attention at the time, and the whole of next day I was busy at
the bedside of the sufferer. It was not until close upon six
o'clock that I found myself free and was able to spring into a
hansom and drive to Baker Street, half afraid that I might be too
late to assist at the dénouement of the little mystery. I found
Sherlock Holmes alone, however, half asleep, with his long, thin
form curled up in the recesses of his armchair. A formidable
array of bottles and test-tubes, with the pungent cleanly smell
of hydrochloric acid, told me that he had spent his day in the
chemical work which was so dear to him.

"Well, have you solved it?" I asked as I entered.

"Yes. It was the bisulphate of baryta."

"No, no, the mystery!" I cried.

"Oh, that! I thought of the salt that I have been working upon.
There was never any mystery in the matter, though, as I said
yesterday, some of the details are of interest. The only drawback
is that there is no law, I fear, that can touch the scoundrel."

"Who was he, then, and what was his object in deserting Miss
Sutherland?"

The question was hardly out of my mouth, and Holmes had not yet
opened his lips to reply, when we heard a heavy footfall in the
passage and a tap at the door.

"This is the girl's stepfather, Mr. James Windibank," said
Holmes. "He has written to me to say that he would be here at
six. Come in!"

The man who entered was a sturdy, middle-sized fellow, some
thirty years of age, clean-shaven, and sallow-skinned, with a
bland, insinuating manner, and a pair of wonderfully sharp and
penetrating grey eyes. He shot a questioning glance at each of
us, placed his shiny top-hat upon the sideboard, and with a
slight bow sidled down into the nearest chair.

"Good-evening, Mr. James Windibank," said Holmes. "I think that
this typewritten letter is from you, in which you made an
appointment with me for six o'clock?"

"Yes, sir. I am afraid that I am a little late, but I am not
quite my own master, you know. I am sorry that Miss Sutherland
has troubled you about this little matter, for I think it is far
better not to wash linen of the sort in public. It was quite
against my wishes that she came, but she is a very excitable,
impulsive girl, as you may have noticed, and she is not easily
controlled when she has made up her mind on a point. Of course, I
did not mind you so much, as you are not connected with the
official police, but it is not pleasant to have a family
misfortune like this noised abroad. Besides, it is a useless
expense, for how could you possibly find this Hosmer Angel?"

"On the contrary," said Holmes quietly; "I have every reason to
believe that I will succeed in discovering Mr. Hosmer Angel."

Mr. Windibank gave a violent start and dropped his gloves. "I am
delighted to hear it," he said.

"It is a curious thing," remarked Holmes, "that a typewriter has
really quite as much individuality as a man's handwriting. Unless
they are quite new, no two of them write exactly alike. Some
letters get more worn than others, and some wear only on one
side. Now, you remark in this note of yours, Mr. Windibank, that
in every case there is some little slurring over of the 'e,' and
a slight defect in the tail of the 'r.' There are fourteen other
characteristics, but those are the more obvious."

"We do all our correspondence with this machine at the office,
and no doubt it is a little worn," our visitor answered, glancing
keenly at Holmes with his bright little eyes.

"And now I will show you what is really a very interesting study,
Mr. Windibank," Holmes continued. "I think of writing another
little monograph some of these days on the typewriter and its
relation to crime. It is a subject to which I have devoted some
little attention. I have here four letters which purport to come
from the missing man. They are all typewritten. In each case, not
only are the 'e's' slurred and the 'r's' tailless, but you will
observe, if you care to use my magnifying lens, that the fourteen
other characteristics to which I have alluded are there as well."

Mr. Windibank sprang out of his chair and picked up his hat. "I
cannot waste time over this sort of fantastic talk, Mr. Holmes,"
he said. "If you can catch the man, catch him, and let me know
when you have done it."

"Certainly," said Holmes, stepping over and turning the key in
the door. "I let you know, then, that I have caught him!"

"What! where?" shouted Mr. Windibank, turning white to his lips
and glancing about him like a rat in a trap.

"Oh, it won't do--really it won't," said Holmes suavely. "There
is no possible getting out of it, Mr. Windibank. It is quite too
transparent, and it was a very bad compliment when you said that
it was impossible for me to solve so simple a question. That's
right! Sit down and let us talk it over."

Our visitor collapsed into a chair, with a ghastly face and a
glitter of moisture on his brow. "It--it's not actionable," he
stammered.

"I am very much afraid that it is not. But between ourselves,
Windibank, it was as cruel and selfish and heartless a trick in a
petty way as ever came before me. Now, let me just run over the
course of events, and you will contradict me if I go wrong."

The man sat huddled up in his chair, with his head sunk upon his
breast, like one who is utterly crushed. Holmes stuck his feet up
on the corner of the mantelpiece and, leaning back with his hands
in his pockets, began talking, rather to himself, as it seemed,
than to us.

"The man married a woman very much older than himself for her
money," said he, "and he enjoyed the use of the money of the
daughter as long as she lived with them. It was a considerable
sum, for people in their position, and the loss of it would have
made a serious difference. It was worth an effort to preserve it.
The daughter was of a good, amiable disposition, but affectionate
and warm-hearted in her ways, so that it was evident that with
her fair personal advantages, and her little income, she would
not be allowed to remain single long. Now her marriage would
mean, of course, the loss of a hundred a year, so what does her
stepfather do to prevent it? He takes the obvious course of
keeping her at home and forbidding her to seek the company of
people of her own age. But soon he found that that would not
answer forever. She became restive, insisted upon her rights, and
finally announced her positive intention of going to a certain
ball. What does her clever stepfather do then? He conceives an
idea more creditable to his head than to his heart. With the
connivance and assistance of his wife he disguised himself,
covered those keen eyes with tinted glasses, masked the face with
a moustache and a pair of bushy whiskers, sunk that clear voice
into an insinuating whisper, and doubly secure on account of the
girl's short sight, he appears as Mr. Hosmer Angel, and keeps off
other lovers by making love himself."

"It was only a joke at first," groaned our visitor. "We never
thought that she would have been so carried away."

"Very likely not. However that may be, the young lady was very
decidedly carried away, and, having quite made up her mind that
her stepfather was in France, the suspicion of treachery never
for an instant entered her mind. She was flattered by the
gentleman's attentions, and the effect was increased by the
loudly expressed admiration of her mother. Then Mr. Angel began
to call, for it was obvious that the matter should be pushed as
far as it would go if a real effect were to be produced. There
were meetings, and an engagement, which would finally secure the
girl's affections from turning towards anyone else. But the
deception could not be kept up forever. These pretended journeys
to France were rather cumbrous. The thing to do was clearly to
bring the business to an end in such a dramatic manner that it
would leave a permanent impression upon the young lady's mind and
prevent her from looking upon any other suitor for some time to
come. Hence those vows of fidelity exacted upon a Testament, and
hence also the allusions to a possibility of something happening
on the very morning of the wedding. James Windibank wished Miss
Sutherland to be so bound to Hosmer Angel, and so uncertain as to
his fate, that for ten years to come, at any rate, she would not
listen to another man. As far as the church door he brought her,
and then, as he could go no farther, he conveniently vanished
away by the old trick of stepping in at one door of a
four-wheeler and out at the other. I think that was the chain of
events, Mr. Windibank!"

Our visitor had recovered something of his assurance while Holmes
had been talking, and he rose from his chair now with a cold
sneer upon his pale face.

"It may be so, or it may not, Mr. Holmes," said he, "but if you
are so very sharp you ought to be sharp enough to know that it is
you who are breaking the law now, and not me. I have done nothing
actionable from the first, but as long as you keep that door
locked you lay yourself open to an action for assault and illegal
constraint."

"The law cannot, as you say, touch you," said Holmes, unlocking
and throwing open the door, "yet there never was a man who
deserved punishment more. If the young lady has a brother or a
friend, he ought to lay a whip across your shoulders. By Jove!"
he continued, flushing up at the sight of the bitter sneer upon
the man's face, "it is not part of my duties to my client, but
here's a hunting crop handy, and I think I shall just treat
myself to--" He took two swift steps to the whip, but before he
could grasp it there was a wild clatter of steps upon the stairs,
the heavy hall door banged, and from the window we could see Mr.
James Windibank running at the top of his speed down the road.

"There's a cold-blooded scoundrel!" said Holmes, laughing, as he
threw himself down into his chair once more. "That fellow will
rise from crime to crime until he does something very bad, and
ends on a gallows. The case has, in some respects, been not
entirely devoid of interest."

"I cannot now entirely see all the steps of your reasoning," I
remarked.

"Well, of course it was obvious from the first that this Mr.
Hosmer Angel must have some strong object for his curious
conduct, and it was equally clear that the only man who really
profited by the incident, as far as we could see, was the
stepfather. Then the fact that the two men were never together,
but that the one always appeared when the other was away, was
suggestive. So were the tinted spectacles and the curious voice,
which both hinted at a disguise, as did the bushy whiskers. My
suspicions were all confirmed by his peculiar action in
typewriting his signature, which, of course, inferred that his
handwriting was so familiar to her that she would recognise even
the smallest sample of it. You see all these isolated facts,
together with many minor ones, all pointed in the same
direction."

"And how did you verify them?"

"Having once spotted my man, it was easy to get corroboration. I
knew the firm for which this man worked. Having taken the printed
description. I eliminated everything from it which could be the
result of a disguise--the whiskers, the glasses, the voice, and I
sent it to the firm, with a request that they would inform me
whether it answered to the description of any of their
travellers. I had already noticed the peculiarities of the
typewriter, and I wrote to the man himself at his business
address asking him if he would come here. As I expected, his
reply was typewritten and revealed the same trivial but
characteristic defects. The same post brought me a letter from
Westhouse & Marbank, of Fenchurch Street, to say that the
description tallied in every respect with that of their employé,
James Windibank. Voilà tout!"

"And Miss Sutherland?"

"If I tell her she will not believe me. You may remember the old
Persian saying, 'There is danger for him who taketh the tiger
cub, and danger also for whoso snatches a delusion from a woman.'
There is as much sense in Hafiz as in Horace, and as much
knowledge of the world."



ADVENTURE IV. THE BOSCOMBE VALLEY MYSTERY

We were seated at breakfast one morning, my wife and I, when the
maid brought in a telegram. It was from Sherlock Holmes and ran
in this way:

"Have you a couple of days to spare? Have just been wired for from
the west of England in connection with Boscombe Valley tragedy.
Shall be glad if you will come with me. Air and scenery perfect.
Leave Paddington by the 11:15."

"What do you say, dear?" said my wife, looking across at me.
"Will you go?"

"I really don't know what to say. I have a fairly long list at
present."

"Oh, Anstruther would do your work for you. You have been looking
a little pale lately. I think that the change would do you good,
and you are always so interested in Mr. Sherlock Holmes' cases."

"I should be ungrateful if I were not, seeing what I gained
through one of them," I answered. "But if I am to go, I must pack
at once, for I have only half an hour."

My experience of camp life in Afghanistan had at least had the
effect of making me a prompt and ready traveller. My wants were
few and simple, so that in less than the time stated I was in a
cab with my valise, rattling away to Paddington Station. Sherlock
Holmes was pacing up and down the platform, his tall, gaunt
figure made even gaunter and taller by his long grey
travelling-cloak and close-fitting cloth cap.

"It is really very good of you to come, Watson," said he. "It
makes a considerable difference to me, having someone with me on
whom I can thoroughly rely. Local aid is always either worthless
or else biassed. If you will keep the two corner seats I shall
get the tickets."

We had the carriage to ourselves save for an immense litter of
papers which Holmes had brought with him. Among these he rummaged
and read, with intervals of note-taking and of meditation, until
we were past Reading. Then he suddenly rolled them all into a
gigantic ball and tossed them up onto the rack.

"Have you heard anything of the case?" he asked.

"Not a word. I have not seen a paper for some days."

"The London press has not had very full accounts. I have just
been looking through all the recent papers in order to master the
particulars. It seems, from what I gather, to be one of those
simple cases which are so extremely difficult."

"That sounds a little paradoxical."

"But it is profoundly true. Singularity is almost invariably a
clue. The more featureless and commonplace a crime is, the more
difficult it is to bring it home. In this case, however, they
have established a very serious case against the son of the
murdered man."

"It is a murder, then?"

"Well, it is conjectured to be so. I shall take nothing for
granted until I have the opportunity of looking personally into
it. I will explain the state of things to you, as far as I have
been able to understand it, in a very few words.

"Boscombe Valley is a country district not very far from Ross, in
Herefordshire. The largest landed proprietor in that part is a
Mr. John Turner, who made his money in Australia and returned
some years ago to the old country. One of the farms which he
held, that of Hatherley, was let to Mr. Charles McCarthy, who was
also an ex-Australian. The men had known each other in the
colonies, so that it was not unnatural that when they came to
settle down they should do so as near each other as possible.
Turner was apparently the richer man, so McCarthy became his
tenant but still remained, it seems, upon terms of perfect
equality, as they were frequently together. McCarthy had one son,
a lad of eighteen, and Turner had an only daughter of the same
age, but neither of them had wives living. They appear to have
avoided the society of the neighbouring English families and to
have led retired lives, though both the McCarthys were fond of
sport and were frequently seen at the race-meetings of the
neighbourhood. McCarthy kept two servants--a man and a girl.
Turner had a considerable household, some half-dozen at the
least. That is as much as I have been able to gather about the
families. Now for the facts.

"On June 3rd, that is, on Monday last, McCarthy left his house at
Hatherley about three in the afternoon and walked down to the
Boscombe Pool, which is a small lake formed by the spreading out
of the stream which runs down the Boscombe Valley. He had been
out with his serving-man in the morning at Ross, and he had told
the man that he must hurry, as he had an appointment of
importance to keep at three. From that appointment he never came
back alive.

"From Hatherley Farm-house to the Boscombe Pool is a quarter of a
mile, and two people saw him as he passed over this ground. One
was an old woman, whose name is not mentioned, and the other was
William Crowder, a game-keeper in the employ of Mr. Turner. Both
these witnesses depose that Mr. McCarthy was walking alone. The
game-keeper adds that within a few minutes of his seeing Mr.
McCarthy pass he had seen his son, Mr. James McCarthy, going the
same way with a gun under his arm. To the best of his belief, the
father was actually in sight at the time, and the son was
following him. He thought no more of the matter until he heard in
the evening of the tragedy that had occurred.

"The two McCarthys were seen after the time when William Crowder,
the game-keeper, lost sight of them. The Boscombe Pool is thickly
wooded round, with just a fringe of grass and of reeds round the
edge. A girl of fourteen, Patience Moran, who is the daughter of
the lodge-keeper of the Boscombe Valley estate, was in one of the
woods picking flowers. She states that while she was there she
saw, at the border of the wood and close by the lake, Mr.
McCarthy and his son, and that they appeared to be having a
violent quarrel. She heard Mr. McCarthy the elder using very
strong language to his son, and she saw the latter raise up his
hand as if to strike his father. She was so frightened by their
violence that she ran away and told her mother when she reached
home that she had left the two McCarthys quarrelling near
Boscombe Pool, and that she was afraid that they were going to
fight. She had hardly said the words when young Mr. McCarthy came
running up to the lodge to say that he had found his father dead
in the wood, and to ask for the help of the lodge-keeper. He was
much excited, without either his gun or his hat, and his right
hand and sleeve were observed to be stained with fresh blood. On
following him they found the dead body stretched out upon the
grass beside the pool. The head had been beaten in by repeated
blows of some heavy and blunt weapon. The injuries were such as
might very well have been inflicted by the butt-end of his son's
gun, which was found lying on the grass within a few paces of the
body. Under these circumstances the young man was instantly
arrested, and a verdict of 'wilful murder' having been returned
at the inquest on Tuesday, he was on Wednesday brought before the
magistrates at Ross, who have referred the case to the next
Assizes. Those are the main facts of the case as they came out
before the coroner and the police-court."

"I could hardly imagine a more damning case," I remarked. "If
ever circumstantial evidence pointed to a criminal it does so
here."

"Circumstantial evidence is a very tricky thing," answered Holmes
thoughtfully. "It may seem to point very straight to one thing,
but if you shift your own point of view a little, you may find it
pointing in an equally uncompromising manner to something
entirely different. It must be confessed, however, that the case
looks exceedingly grave against the young man, and it is very
possible that he is indeed the culprit. There are several people
in the neighbourhood, however, and among them Miss Turner, the
daughter of the neighbouring landowner, who believe in his
innocence, and who have retained Lestrade, whom you may recollect
in connection with the Study in Scarlet, to work out the case in
his interest. Lestrade, being rather puzzled, has referred the
case to me, and hence it is that two middle-aged gentlemen are
flying westward at fifty miles an hour instead of quietly
digesting their breakfasts at home."

"I am afraid," said I, "that the facts are so obvious that you
will find little credit to be gained out of this case."

"There is nothing more deceptive than an obvious fact," he
answered, laughing. "Besides, we may chance to hit upon some
other obvious facts which may have been by no means obvious to
Mr. Lestrade. You know me too well to think that I am boasting
when I say that I shall either confirm or destroy his theory by
means which he is quite incapable of employing, or even of
understanding. To take the first example to hand, I very clearly
perceive that in your bedroom the window is upon the right-hand
side, and yet I question whether Mr. Lestrade would have noted
even so self-evident a thing as that."

"How on earth--"

"My dear fellow, I know you well. I know the military neatness
which characterises you. You shave every morning, and in this
season you shave by the sunlight; but since your shaving is less
and less complete as we get farther back on the left side, until
it becomes positively slovenly as we get round the angle of the
jaw, it is surely very clear that that side is less illuminated
than the other. I could not imagine a man of your habits looking
at himself in an equal light and being satisfied with such a
result. I only quote this as a trivial example of observation and
inference. Therein lies my métier, and it is just possible that
it may be of some service in the investigation which lies before
us. There are one or two minor points which were brought out in
the inquest, and which are worth considering."

"What are they?"

"It appears that his arrest did not take place at once, but after
the return to Hatherley Farm. On the inspector of constabulary
informing him that he was a prisoner, he remarked that he was not
surprised to hear it, and that it was no more than his deserts.
This observation of his had the natural effect of removing any
traces of doubt which might have remained in the minds of the
coroner's jury."

"It was a confession," I ejaculated.

"No, for it was followed by a protestation of innocence."

"Coming on the top of such a damning series of events, it was at
least a most suspicious remark."

"On the contrary," said Holmes, "it is the brightest rift which I
can at present see in the clouds. However innocent he might be,
he could not be such an absolute imbecile as not to see that the
circumstances were very black against him. Had he appeared
surprised at his own arrest, or feigned indignation at it, I
should have looked upon it as highly suspicious, because such
surprise or anger would not be natural under the circumstances,
and yet might appear to be the best policy to a scheming man. His
frank acceptance of the situation marks him as either an innocent
man, or else as a man of considerable self-restraint and
firmness. As to his remark about his deserts, it was also not
unnatural if you consider that he stood beside the dead body of
his father, and that there is no doubt that he had that very day
so far forgotten his filial duty as to bandy words with him, and
even, according to the little girl whose evidence is so
important, to raise his hand as if to strike him. The
self-reproach and contrition which are displayed in his remark
appear to me to be the signs of a healthy mind rather than of a
guilty one."

I shook my head. "Many men have been hanged on far slighter
evidence," I remarked.

"So they have. And many men have been wrongfully hanged."

"What is the young man's own account of the matter?"

"It is, I am afraid, not very encouraging to his supporters,
though there are one or two points in it which are suggestive.
You will find it here, and may read it for yourself."

He picked out from his bundle a copy of the local Herefordshire
paper, and having turned down the sheet he pointed out the
paragraph in which the unfortunate young man had given his own
statement of what had occurred. I settled myself down in the
corner of the carriage and read it very carefully. It ran in this
way:

"Mr. James McCarthy, the only son of the deceased, was then called
and gave evidence as follows: 'I had been away from home for
three days at Bristol, and had only just returned upon the
morning of last Monday, the 3rd. My father was absent from home at
the time of my arrival, and I was informed by the maid that he
had driven over to Ross with John Cobb, the groom. Shortly after
my return I heard the wheels of his trap in the yard, and,
looking out of my window, I saw him get out and walk rapidly out
of the yard, though I was not aware in which direction he was
going. I then took my gun and strolled out in the direction of
the Boscombe Pool, with the intention of visiting the rabbit
warren which is upon the other side. On my way I saw William
Crowder, the game-keeper, as he had stated in his evidence; but
he is mistaken in thinking that I was following my father. I had
no idea that he was in front of me. When about a hundred yards
from the pool I heard a cry of "Cooee!" which was a usual signal
between my father and myself. I then hurried forward, and found
him standing by the pool. He appeared to be much surprised at
seeing me and asked me rather roughly what I was doing there. A
conversation ensued which led to high words and almost to blows,
for my father was a man of a very violent temper. Seeing that his
passion was becoming ungovernable, I left him and returned
towards Hatherley Farm. I had not gone more than 150 yards,
however, when I heard a hideous outcry behind me, which caused me
to run back again. I found my father expiring upon the ground,
with his head terribly injured. I dropped my gun and held him in
my arms, but he almost instantly expired. I knelt beside him for
some minutes, and then made my way to Mr. Turner's lodge-keeper,
his house being the nearest, to ask for assistance. I saw no one
near my father when I returned, and I have no idea how he came by
his injuries. He was not a popular man, being somewhat cold and
forbidding in his manners, but he had, as far as I know, no
active enemies. I know nothing further of the matter.'

"The Coroner: Did your father make any statement to you before
he died?

"Witness: He mumbled a few words, but I could only catch some
allusion to a rat.

"The Coroner: What did you understand by that?

"Witness: It conveyed no meaning to me. I thought that he was
delirious.

"The Coroner: What was the point upon which you and your father
had this final quarrel?

"Witness: I should prefer not to answer.

"The Coroner: I am afraid that I must press it.

"Witness: It is really impossible for me to tell you. I can
assure you that it has nothing to do with the sad tragedy which
followed.

"The Coroner: That is for the court to decide. I need not point
out to you that your refusal to answer will prejudice your case
considerably in any future proceedings which may arise.

"Witness: I must still refuse.

"The Coroner: I understand that the cry of 'Cooee' was a common
signal between you and your father?

"Witness: It was.

"The Coroner: How was it, then, that he uttered it before he saw
you, and before he even knew that you had returned from Bristol?

"Witness (with considerable confusion): I do not know.

"A Juryman: Did you see nothing which aroused your suspicions
when you returned on hearing the cry and found your father
fatally injured?

"Witness: Nothing definite.

"The Coroner: What do you mean?

"Witness: I was so disturbed and excited as I rushed out into
the open, that I could think of nothing except of my father. Yet
I have a vague impression that as I ran forward something lay
upon the ground to the left of me. It seemed to me to be
something grey in colour, a coat of some sort, or a plaid perhaps.
When I rose from my father I looked round for it, but it was
gone.

"'Do you mean that it disappeared before you went for help?'

"'Yes, it was gone.'

"'You cannot say what it was?'

"'No, I had a feeling something was there.'

"'How far from the body?'

"'A dozen yards or so.'

"'And how far from the edge of the wood?'

"'About the same.'

"'Then if it was removed it was while you were within a dozen
yards of it?'

"'Yes, but with my back towards it.'

"This concluded the examination of the witness."

"I see," said I as I glanced down the column, "that the coroner
in his concluding remarks was rather severe upon young McCarthy.
He calls attention, and with reason, to the discrepancy about his
father having signalled to him before seeing him, also to his
refusal to give details of his conversation with his father, and
his singular account of his father's dying words. They are all,
as he remarks, very much against the son."

Holmes laughed softly to himself and stretched himself out upon
the cushioned seat. "Both you and the coroner have been at some
pains," said he, "to single out the very strongest points in the
young man's favour. Don't you see that you alternately give him
credit for having too much imagination and too little? Too
little, if he could not invent a cause of quarrel which would
give him the sympathy of the jury; too much, if he evolved from
his own inner consciousness anything so outré as a dying
reference to a rat, and the incident of the vanishing cloth. No,
sir, I shall approach this case from the point of view that what
this young man says is true, and we shall see whither that
hypothesis will lead us. And now here is my pocket Petrarch, and
not another word shall I say of this case until we are on the
scene of action. We lunch at Swindon, and I see that we shall be
there in twenty minutes."

It was nearly four o'clock when we at last, after passing through
the beautiful Stroud Valley, and over the broad gleaming Severn,
found ourselves at the pretty little country-town of Ross. A
lean, ferret-like man, furtive and sly-looking, was waiting for
us upon the platform. In spite of the light brown dustcoat and
leather-leggings which he wore in deference to his rustic
surroundings, I had no difficulty in recognising Lestrade, of
Scotland Yard. With him we drove to the Hereford Arms where a
room had already been engaged for us.

"I have ordered a carriage," said Lestrade as we sat over a cup
of tea. "I knew your energetic nature, and that you would not be
happy until you had been on the scene of the crime."

"It was very nice and complimentary of you," Holmes answered. "It
is entirely a question of barometric pressure."

Lestrade looked startled. "I do not quite follow," he said.

"How is the glass? Twenty-nine, I see. No wind, and not a cloud
in the sky. I have a caseful of cigarettes here which need
smoking, and the sofa is very much superior to the usual country
hotel abomination. I do not think that it is probable that I
shall use the carriage to-night."

Lestrade laughed indulgently. "You have, no doubt, already formed
your conclusions from the newspapers," he said. "The case is as
plain as a pikestaff, and the more one goes into it the plainer
it becomes. Still, of course, one can't refuse a lady, and such a
very positive one, too. She has heard of you, and would have your
opinion, though I repeatedly told her that there was nothing
which you could do which I had not already done. Why, bless my
soul! here is her carriage at the door."

He had hardly spoken before there rushed into the room one of the
most lovely young women that I have ever seen in my life. Her
violet eyes shining, her lips parted, a pink flush upon her
cheeks, all thought of her natural reserve lost in her
overpowering excitement and concern.

"Oh, Mr. Sherlock Holmes!" she cried, glancing from one to the
other of us, and finally, with a woman's quick intuition,
fastening upon my companion, "I am so glad that you have come. I
have driven down to tell you so. I know that James didn't do it.
I know it, and I want you to start upon your work knowing it,
too. Never let yourself doubt upon that point. We have known each
other since we were little children, and I know his faults as no
one else does; but he is too tender-hearted to hurt a fly. Such a
charge is absurd to anyone who really knows him."

"I hope we may clear him, Miss Turner," said Sherlock Holmes.
"You may rely upon my doing all that I can."

"But you have read the evidence. You have formed some conclusion?
Do you not see some loophole, some flaw? Do you not yourself
think that he is innocent?"

"I think that it is very probable."

"There, now!" she cried, throwing back her head and looking
defiantly at Lestrade. "You hear! He gives me hopes."

Lestrade shrugged his shoulders. "I am afraid that my colleague
has been a little quick in forming his conclusions," he said.

"But he is right. Oh! I know that he is right. James never did
it. And about his quarrel with his father, I am sure that the
reason why he would not speak about it to the coroner was because
I was concerned in it."

"In what way?" asked Holmes.

"It is no time for me to hide anything. James and his father had
many disagreements about me. Mr. McCarthy was very anxious that
there should be a marriage between us. James and I have always
loved each other as brother and sister; but of course he is young
and has seen very little of life yet, and--and--well, he
naturally did not wish to do anything like that yet. So there
were quarrels, and this, I am sure, was one of them."

"And your father?" asked Holmes. "Was he in favour of such a
union?"

"No, he was averse to it also. No one but Mr. McCarthy was in
favour of it." A quick blush passed over her fresh young face as
Holmes shot one of his keen, questioning glances at her.

"Thank you for this information," said he. "May I see your father
if I call to-morrow?"

"I am afraid the doctor won't allow it."

"The doctor?"

"Yes, have you not heard? Poor father has never been strong for
years back, but this has broken him down completely. He has taken
to his bed, and Dr. Willows says that he is a wreck and that his
nervous system is shattered. Mr. McCarthy was the only man alive
who had known dad in the old days in Victoria."

"Ha! In Victoria! That is important."

"Yes, at the mines."

"Quite so; at the gold-mines, where, as I understand, Mr. Turner
made his money."

"Yes, certainly."

"Thank you, Miss Turner. You have been of material assistance to
me."

"You will tell me if you have any news to-morrow. No doubt you
will go to the prison to see James. Oh, if you do, Mr. Holmes, do
tell him that I know him to be innocent."

"I will, Miss Turner."

"I must go home now, for dad is very ill, and he misses me so if
I leave him. Good-bye, and God help you in your undertaking." She
hurried from the room as impulsively as she had entered, and we
heard the wheels of her carriage rattle off down the street.

"I am ashamed of you, Holmes," said Lestrade with dignity after a
few minutes' silence. "Why should you raise up hopes which you
are bound to disappoint? I am not over-tender of heart, but I
call it cruel."

"I think that I see my way to clearing James McCarthy," said
Holmes. "Have you an order to see him in prison?"

"Yes, but only for you and me."

"Then I shall reconsider my resolution about going out. We have
still time to take a train to Hereford and see him to-night?"

"Ample."

"Then let us do so. Watson, I fear that you will find it very
slow, but I shall only be away a couple of hours."

I walked down to the station with them, and then wandered through
the streets of the little town, finally returning to the hotel,
where I lay upon the sofa and tried to interest myself in a
yellow-backed novel. The puny plot of the story was so thin,
however, when compared to the deep mystery through which we were
groping, and I found my attention wander so continually from the
action to the fact, that I at last flung it across the room and
gave myself up entirely to a consideration of the events of the
day. Supposing that this unhappy young man's story were
absolutely true, then what hellish thing, what absolutely
unforeseen and extraordinary calamity could have occurred between
the time when he parted from his father, and the moment when,
drawn back by his screams, he rushed into the glade? It was
something terrible and deadly. What could it be? Might not the
nature of the injuries reveal something to my medical instincts?
I rang the bell and called for the weekly county paper, which
contained a verbatim account of the inquest. In the surgeon's
deposition it was stated that the posterior third of the left
parietal bone and the left half of the occipital bone had been
shattered by a heavy blow from a blunt weapon. I marked the spot
upon my own head. Clearly such a blow must have been struck from
behind. That was to some extent in favour of the accused, as when
seen quarrelling he was face to face with his father. Still, it
did not go for very much, for the older man might have turned his
back before the blow fell. Still, it might be worth while to call
Holmes' attention to it. Then there was the peculiar dying
reference to a rat. What could that mean? It could not be
delirium. A man dying from a sudden blow does not commonly become
delirious. No, it was more likely to be an attempt to explain how
he met his fate. But what could it indicate? I cudgelled my
brains to find some possible explanation. And then the incident
of the grey cloth seen by young McCarthy. If that were true the
murderer must have dropped some part of his dress, presumably his
overcoat, in his flight, and must have had the hardihood to
return and to carry it away at the instant when the son was
kneeling with his back turned not a dozen paces off. What a
tissue of mysteries and improbabilities the whole thing was! I
did not wonder at Lestrade's opinion, and yet I had so much faith
in Sherlock Holmes' insight that I could not lose hope as long
as every fresh fact seemed to strengthen his conviction of young
McCarthy's innocence.

It was late before Sherlock Holmes returned. He came back alone,
for Lestrade was staying in lodgings in the town.

"The glass still keeps very high," he remarked as he sat down.
"It is of importance that it should not rain before we are able
to go over the ground. On the other hand, a man should be at his
very best and keenest for such nice work as that, and I did not
wish to do it when fagged by a long journey. I have seen young
McCarthy."

"And what did you learn from him?"

"Nothing."

"Could he throw no light?"

"None at all. I was inclined to think at one time that he knew
who had done it and was screening him or her, but I am convinced
now that he is as puzzled as everyone else. He is not a very
quick-witted youth, though comely to look at and, I should think,
sound at heart."

"I cannot admire his taste," I remarked, "if it is indeed a fact
that he was averse to a marriage with so charming a young lady as
this Miss Turner."

"Ah, thereby hangs a rather painful tale. This fellow is madly,
insanely, in love with her, but some two years ago, when he was
only a lad, and before he really knew her, for she had been away
five years at a boarding-school, what does the idiot do but get
into the clutches of a barmaid in Bristol and marry her at a
registry office? No one knows a word of the matter, but you can
imagine how maddening it must be to him to be upbraided for not
doing what he would give his very eyes to do, but what he knows
to be absolutely impossible. It was sheer frenzy of this sort
which made him throw his hands up into the air when his father,
at their last interview, was goading him on to propose to Miss
Turner. On the other hand, he had no means of supporting himself,
and his father, who was by all accounts a very hard man, would
have thrown him over utterly had he known the truth. It was with
his barmaid wife that he had spent the last three days in
Bristol, and his father did not know where he was. Mark that
point. It is of importance. Good has come out of evil, however,
for the barmaid, finding from the papers that he is in serious
trouble and likely to be hanged, has thrown him over utterly and
has written to him to say that she has a husband already in the
Bermuda Dockyard, so that there is really no tie between them. I
think that that bit of news has consoled young McCarthy for all
that he has suffered."

"But if he is innocent, who has done it?"

"Ah! who? I would call your attention very particularly to two
points. One is that the murdered man had an appointment with
someone at the pool, and that the someone could not have been his
son, for his son was away, and he did not know when he would
return. The second is that the murdered man was heard to cry
'Cooee!' before he knew that his son had returned. Those are the
crucial points upon which the case depends. And now let us talk
about George Meredith, if you please, and we shall leave all
minor matters until to-morrow."

There was no rain, as Holmes had foretold, and the morning broke
bright and cloudless. At nine o'clock Lestrade called for us with
the carriage, and we set off for Hatherley Farm and the Boscombe
Pool.

"There is serious news this morning," Lestrade observed. "It is
said that Mr. Turner, of the Hall, is so ill that his life is
despaired of."

"An elderly man, I presume?" said Holmes.

"About sixty; but his constitution has been shattered by his life
abroad, and he has been in failing health for some time. This
business has had a very bad effect upon him. He was an old friend
of McCarthy's, and, I may add, a great benefactor to him, for I
have learned that he gave him Hatherley Farm rent free."

"Indeed! That is interesting," said Holmes.

"Oh, yes! In a hundred other ways he has helped him. Everybody
about here speaks of his kindness to him."

"Really! Does it not strike you as a little singular that this
McCarthy, who appears to have had little of his own, and to have
been under such obligations to Turner, should still talk of
marrying his son to Turner's daughter, who is, presumably,
heiress to the estate, and that in such a very cocksure manner,
as if it were merely a case of a proposal and all else would
follow? It is the more strange, since we know that Turner himself
was averse to the idea. The daughter told us as much. Do you not
deduce something from that?"

"We have got to the deductions and the inferences," said
Lestrade, winking at me. "I find it hard enough to tackle facts,
Holmes, without flying away after theories and fancies."

"You are right," said Holmes demurely; "you do find it very hard
to tackle the facts."

"Anyhow, I have grasped one fact which you seem to find it
difficult to get hold of," replied Lestrade with some warmth.

"And that is--"

"That McCarthy senior met his death from McCarthy junior and that
all theories to the contrary are the merest moonshine."

"Well, moonshine is a brighter thing than fog," said Holmes,
laughing. "But I am very much mistaken if this is not Hatherley
Farm upon the left."

"Yes, that is it." It was a widespread, comfortable-looking
building, two-storied, slate-roofed, with great yellow blotches
of lichen upon the grey walls. The drawn blinds and the smokeless
chimneys, however, gave it a stricken look, as though the weight
of this horror still lay heavy upon it. We called at the door,
when the maid, at Holmes' request, showed us the boots which her
master wore at the time of his death, and also a pair of the
son's, though not the pair which he had then had. Having measured
these very carefully from seven or eight different points, Holmes
desired to be led to the court-yard, from which we all followed
the winding track which led to Boscombe Pool.

Sherlock Holmes was transformed when he was hot upon such a scent
as this. Men who had only known the quiet thinker and logician of
Baker Street would have failed to recognise him. His face flushed
and darkened. His brows were drawn into two hard black lines,
while his eyes shone out from beneath them with a steely glitter.
His face was bent downward, his shoulders bowed, his lips
compressed, and the veins stood out like whipcord in his long,
sinewy neck. His nostrils seemed to dilate with a purely animal
lust for the chase, and his mind was so absolutely concentrated
upon the matter before him that a question or remark fell
unheeded upon his ears, or, at the most, only provoked a quick,
impatient snarl in reply. Swiftly and silently he made his way
along the track which ran through the meadows, and so by way of
the woods to the Boscombe Pool. It was damp, marshy ground, as is
all that district, and there were marks of many feet, both upon
the path and amid the short grass which bounded it on either
side. Sometimes Holmes would hurry on, sometimes stop dead, and
once he made quite a little detour into the meadow. Lestrade and
I walked behind him, the detective indifferent and contemptuous,
while I watched my friend with the interest which sprang from the
conviction that every one of his actions was directed towards a
definite end.

The Boscombe Pool, which is a little reed-girt sheet of water
some fifty yards across, is situated at the boundary between the
Hatherley Farm and the private park of the wealthy Mr. Turner.
Above the woods which lined it upon the farther side we could see
the red, jutting pinnacles which marked the site of the rich
landowner's dwelling. On the Hatherley side of the pool the woods
grew very thick, and there was a narrow belt of sodden grass
twenty paces across between the edge of the trees and the reeds
which lined the lake. Lestrade showed us the exact spot at which
the body had been found, and, indeed, so moist was the ground,
that I could plainly see the traces which had been left by the
fall of the stricken man. To Holmes, as I could see by his eager
face and peering eyes, very many other things were to be read
upon the trampled grass. He ran round, like a dog who is picking
up a scent, and then turned upon my companion.

"What did you go into the pool for?" he asked.

"I fished about with a rake. I thought there might be some weapon
or other trace. But how on earth--"

"Oh, tut, tut! I have no time! That left foot of yours with its
inward twist is all over the place. A mole could trace it, and
there it vanishes among the reeds. Oh, how simple it would all
have been had I been here before they came like a herd of buffalo
and wallowed all over it. Here is where the party with the
lodge-keeper came, and they have covered all tracks for six or
eight feet round the body. But here are three separate tracks of
the same feet." He drew out a lens and lay down upon his
waterproof to have a better view, talking all the time rather to
himself than to us. "These are young McCarthy's feet. Twice he
was walking, and once he ran swiftly, so that the soles are
deeply marked and the heels hardly visible. That bears out his
story. He ran when he saw his father on the ground. Then here are
the father's feet as he paced up and down. What is this, then? It
is the butt-end of the gun as the son stood listening. And this?
Ha, ha! What have we here? Tiptoes! tiptoes! Square, too, quite
unusual boots! They come, they go, they come again--of course
that was for the cloak. Now where did they come from?" He ran up
and down, sometimes losing, sometimes finding the track until we
were well within the edge of the wood and under the shadow of a
great beech, the largest tree in the neighbourhood. Holmes traced
his way to the farther side of this and lay down once more upon
his face with a little cry of satisfaction. For a long time he
remained there, turning over the leaves and dried sticks,
gathering up what seemed to me to be dust into an envelope and
examining with his lens not only the ground but even the bark of
the tree as far as he could reach. A jagged stone was lying among
the moss, and this also he carefully examined and retained. Then
he followed a pathway through the wood until he came to the
highroad, where all traces were lost.

"It has been a case of considerable interest," he remarked,
returning to his natural manner. "I fancy that this grey house on
the right must be the lodge. I think that I will go in and have a
word with Moran, and perhaps write a little note. Having done
that, we may drive back to our luncheon. You may walk to the cab,
and I shall be with you presently."

It was about ten minutes before we regained our cab and drove
back into Ross, Holmes still carrying with him the stone which he
had picked up in the wood.

"This may interest you, Lestrade," he remarked, holding it out.
"The murder was done with it."

"I see no marks."

"There are none."

"How do you know, then?"

"The grass was growing under it. It had only lain there a few
days. There was no sign of a place whence it had been taken. It
corresponds with the injuries. There is no sign of any other
weapon."

"And the murderer?"

"Is a tall man, left-handed, limps with the right leg, wears
thick-soled shooting-boots and a grey cloak, smokes Indian
cigars, uses a cigar-holder, and carries a blunt pen-knife in his
pocket. There are several other indications, but these may be
enough to aid us in our search."

Lestrade laughed. "I am afraid that I am still a sceptic," he
said. "Theories are all very well, but we have to deal with a
hard-headed British jury."

"Nous verrons," answered Holmes calmly. "You work your own
method, and I shall work mine. I shall be busy this afternoon,
and shall probably return to London by the evening train."

"And leave your case unfinished?"

"No, finished."

"But the mystery?"

"It is solved."

"Who was the criminal, then?"

"The gentleman I describe."

"But who is he?"

"Surely it would not be difficult to find out. This is not such a
populous neighbourhood."

Lestrade shrugged his shoulders. "I am a practical man," he said,
"and I really cannot undertake to go about the country looking
for a left-handed gentleman with a game leg. I should become the
laughing-stock of Scotland Yard."

"All right," said Holmes quietly. "I have given you the chance.
Here are your lodgings. Good-bye. I shall drop you a line before
I leave."

Having left Lestrade at his rooms, we drove to our hotel, where
we found lunch upon the table. Holmes was silent and buried in
thought with a pained expression upon his face, as one who finds
himself in a perplexing position.

"Look here, Watson," he said when the cloth was cleared "just sit
down in this chair and let me preach to you for a little. I don't
know quite what to do, and I should value your advice. Light a
cigar and let me expound."

 "Pray do so."

"Well, now, in considering this case there are two points about
young McCarthy's narrative which struck us both instantly,
although they impressed me in his favour and you against him. One
was the fact that his father should, according to his account,
cry 'Cooee!' before seeing him. The other was his singular dying
reference to a rat. He mumbled several words, you understand, but
that was all that caught the son's ear. Now from this double
point our research must commence, and we will begin it by
presuming that what the lad says is absolutely true."

"What of this 'Cooee!' then?"

"Well, obviously it could not have been meant for the son. The
son, as far as he knew, was in Bristol. It was mere chance that
he was within earshot. The 'Cooee!' was meant to attract the
attention of whoever it was that he had the appointment with. But
'Cooee' is a distinctly Australian cry, and one which is used
between Australians. There is a strong presumption that the
person whom McCarthy expected to meet him at Boscombe Pool was
someone who had been in Australia."

"What of the rat, then?"

Sherlock Holmes took a folded paper from his pocket and flattened
it out on the table. "This is a map of the Colony of Victoria,"
he said. "I wired to Bristol for it last night." He put his hand
over part of the map. "What do you read?"

"ARAT," I read.

"And now?" He raised his hand.

"BALLARAT."

"Quite so. That was the word the man uttered, and of which his
son only caught the last two syllables. He was trying to utter
the name of his murderer. So and so, of Ballarat."

"It is wonderful!" I exclaimed.

"It is obvious. And now, you see, I had narrowed the field down
considerably. The possession of a grey garment was a third point
which, granting the son's statement to be correct, was a
certainty. We have come now out of mere vagueness to the definite
conception of an Australian from Ballarat with a grey cloak."

"Certainly."

"And one who was at home in the district, for the pool can only
be approached by the farm or by the estate, where strangers could
hardly wander."

"Quite so."

"Then comes our expedition of to-day. By an examination of the
ground I gained the trifling details which I gave to that
imbecile Lestrade, as to the personality of the criminal."

"But how did you gain them?"

"You know my method. It is founded upon the observation of
trifles."

"His height I know that you might roughly judge from the length
of his stride. His boots, too, might be told from their traces."

"Yes, they were peculiar boots."

"But his lameness?"

"The impression of his right foot was always less distinct than
his left. He put less weight upon it. Why? Because he limped--he
was lame."

"But his left-handedness."

"You were yourself struck by the nature of the injury as recorded
by the surgeon at the inquest. The blow was struck from
immediately behind, and yet was upon the left side. Now, how can
that be unless it were by a left-handed man? He had stood behind
that tree during the interview between the father and son. He had
even smoked there. I found the ash of a cigar, which my special
knowledge of tobacco ashes enables me to pronounce as an Indian
cigar. I have, as you know, devoted some attention to this, and
written a little monograph on the ashes of 140 different
varieties of pipe, cigar, and cigarette tobacco. Having found the
ash, I then looked round and discovered the stump among the moss
where he had tossed it. It was an Indian cigar, of the variety
which are rolled in Rotterdam."

"And the cigar-holder?"

"I could see that the end had not been in his mouth. Therefore he
used a holder. The tip had been cut off, not bitten off, but the
cut was not a clean one, so I deduced a blunt pen-knife."

"Holmes," I said, "you have drawn a net round this man from which
he cannot escape, and you have saved an innocent human life as
truly as if you had cut the cord which was hanging him. I see the
direction in which all this points. The culprit is--"

"Mr. John Turner," cried the hotel waiter, opening the door of
our sitting-room, and ushering in a visitor.

The man who entered was a strange and impressive figure. His
slow, limping step and bowed shoulders gave the appearance of
decrepitude, and yet his hard, deep-lined, craggy features, and
his enormous limbs showed that he was possessed of unusual
strength of body and of character. His tangled beard, grizzled
hair, and outstanding, drooping eyebrows combined to give an air
of dignity and power to his appearance, but his face was of an
ashen white, while his lips and the corners of his nostrils were
tinged with a shade of blue. It was clear to me at a glance that
he was in the grip of some deadly and chronic disease.

"Pray sit down on the sofa," said Holmes gently. "You had my
note?"

"Yes, the lodge-keeper brought it up. You said that you wished to
see me here to avoid scandal."

"I thought people would talk if I went to the Hall."

"And why did you wish to see me?" He looked across at my
companion with despair in his weary eyes, as though his question
was already answered.

"Yes," said Holmes, answering the look rather than the words. "It
is so. I know all about McCarthy."

The old man sank his face in his hands. "God help me!" he cried.
"But I would not have let the young man come to harm. I give you
my word that I would have spoken out if it went against him at
the Assizes."

"I am glad to hear you say so," said Holmes gravely.

"I would have spoken now had it not been for my dear girl. It
would break her heart--it will break her heart when she hears
that I am arrested."

"It may not come to that," said Holmes.

"What?"

"I am no official agent. I understand that it was your daughter
who required my presence here, and I am acting in her interests.
Young McCarthy must be got off, however."

"I am a dying man," said old Turner. "I have had diabetes for
years. My doctor says it is a question whether I shall live a
month. Yet I would rather die under my own roof than in a gaol."

Holmes rose and sat down at the table with his pen in his hand
and a bundle of paper before him. "Just tell us the truth," he
said. "I shall jot down the facts. You will sign it, and Watson
here can witness it. Then I could produce your confession at the
last extremity to save young McCarthy. I promise you that I shall
not use it unless it is absolutely needed."

"It's as well," said the old man; "it's a question whether I
shall live to the Assizes, so it matters little to me, but I
should wish to spare Alice the shock. And now I will make the
thing clear to you; it has been a long time in the acting, but
will not take me long to tell.

"You didn't know this dead man, McCarthy. He was a devil
incarnate. I tell you that. God keep you out of the clutches of
such a man as he. His grip has been upon me these twenty years,
and he has blasted my life. I'll tell you first how I came to be
in his power.

"It was in the early '60's at the diggings. I was a young chap
then, hot-blooded and reckless, ready to turn my hand at
anything; I got among bad companions, took to drink, had no luck
with my claim, took to the bush, and in a word became what you
would call over here a highway robber. There were six of us, and
we had a wild, free life of it, sticking up a station from time
to time, or stopping the wagons on the road to the diggings.
Black Jack of Ballarat was the name I went under, and our party
is still remembered in the colony as the Ballarat Gang.

"One day a gold convoy came down from Ballarat to Melbourne, and
we lay in wait for it and attacked it. There were six troopers
and six of us, so it was a close thing, but we emptied four of
their saddles at the first volley. Three of our boys were killed,
however, before we got the swag. I put my pistol to the head of
the wagon-driver, who was this very man McCarthy. I wish to the
Lord that I had shot him then, but I spared him, though I saw his
wicked little eyes fixed on my face, as though to remember every
feature. We got away with the gold, became wealthy men, and made
our way over to England without being suspected. There I parted
from my old pals and determined to settle down to a quiet and
respectable life. I bought this estate, which chanced to be in
the market, and I set myself to do a little good with my money,
to make up for the way in which I had earned it. I married, too,
and though my wife died young she left me my dear little Alice.
Even when she was just a baby her wee hand seemed to lead me down
the right path as nothing else had ever done. In a word, I turned
over a new leaf and did my best to make up for the past. All was
going well when McCarthy laid his grip upon me.

"I had gone up to town about an investment, and I met him in
Regent Street with hardly a coat to his back or a boot to his
foot.

"'Here we are, Jack,' says he, touching me on the arm; 'we'll be
as good as a family to you. There's two of us, me and my son, and
you can have the keeping of us. If you don't--it's a fine,
law-abiding country is England, and there's always a policeman
within hail.'

"Well, down they came to the west country, there was no shaking
them off, and there they have lived rent free on my best land
ever since. There was no rest for me, no peace, no forgetfulness;
turn where I would, there was his cunning, grinning face at my
elbow. It grew worse as Alice grew up, for he soon saw I was more
afraid of her knowing my past than of the police. Whatever he
wanted he must have, and whatever it was I gave him without
question, land, money, houses, until at last he asked a thing
which I could not give. He asked for Alice.

"His son, you see, had grown up, and so had my girl, and as I was
known to be in weak health, it seemed a fine stroke to him that
his lad should step into the whole property. But there I was
firm. I would not have his cursed stock mixed with mine; not that
I had any dislike to the lad, but his blood was in him, and that
was enough. I stood firm. McCarthy threatened. I braved him to do
his worst. We were to meet at the pool midway between our houses
to talk it over.

"When I went down there I found him talking with his son, so I
smoked a cigar and waited behind a tree until he should be alone.
But as I listened to his talk all that was black and bitter in
me seemed to come uppermost. He was urging his son to marry my
daughter with as little regard for what she might think as if she
were a slut from off the streets. It drove me mad to think that I
and all that I held most dear should be in the power of such a
man as this. Could I not snap the bond? I was already a dying and
a desperate man. Though clear of mind and fairly strong of limb,
I knew that my own fate was sealed. But my memory and my girl!
Both could be saved if I could but silence that foul tongue. I
did it, Mr. Holmes. I would do it again. Deeply as I have sinned,
I have led a life of martyrdom to atone for it. But that my girl
should be entangled in the same meshes which held me was more
than I could suffer. I struck him down with no more compunction
than if he had been some foul and venomous beast. His cry brought
back his son; but I had gained the cover of the wood, though I
was forced to go back to fetch the cloak which I had dropped in
my flight. That is the true story, gentlemen, of all that
occurred."

"Well, it is not for me to judge you," said Holmes as the old man
signed the statement which had been drawn out. "I pray that we
may never be exposed to such a temptation."

"I pray not, sir. And what do you intend to do?"

"In view of your health, nothing. You are yourself aware that you
will soon have to answer for your deed at a higher court than the
Assizes. I will keep your confession, and if McCarthy is
condemned I shall be forced to use it. If not, it shall never be
seen by mortal eye; and your secret, whether you be alive or
dead, shall be safe with us."

"Farewell, then," said the old man solemnly. "Your own deathbeds,
when they come, will be the easier for the thought of the peace
which you have given to mine." Tottering and shaking in all his
giant frame, he stumbled slowly from the room.

"God help us!" said Holmes after a long silence. "Why does fate
play such tricks with poor, helpless worms? I never hear of such
a case as this that I do not think of Baxter's words, and say,
'There, but for the grace of God, goes Sherlock Holmes.'"

James McCarthy was acquitted at the Assizes on the strength of a
number of objections which had been drawn out by Holmes and
submitted to the defending counsel. Old Turner lived for seven
months after our interview, but he is now dead; and there is
every prospect that the son and daughter may come to live happily
together in ignorance of the black cloud which rests upon their
past.



ADVENTURE V. THE FIVE ORANGE PIPS

When I glance over my notes and records of the Sherlock Holmes
cases between the years '82 and '90, I am faced by so many which
present strange and interesting features that it is no easy
matter to know which to choose and which to leave. Some, however,
have already gained publicity through the papers, and others have
not offered a field for those peculiar qualities which my friend
possessed in so high a degree, and which it is the object of
these papers to illustrate. Some, too, have baffled his
analytical skill, and would be, as narratives, beginnings without
an ending, while others have been but partially cleared up, and
have their explanations founded rather upon conjecture and
surmise than on that absolute logical proof which was so dear to
him. There is, however, one of these last which was so remarkable
in its details and so startling in its results that I am tempted
to give some account of it in spite of the fact that there are
points in connection with it which never have been, and probably
never will be, entirely cleared up.

The year '87 furnished us with a long series of cases of greater
or less interest, of which I retain the records. Among my
headings under this one twelve months I find an account of the
adventure of the Paradol Chamber, of the Amateur Mendicant
Society, who held a luxurious club in the lower vault of a
furniture warehouse, of the facts connected with the loss of the
British barque "Sophy Anderson", of the singular adventures of the
Grice Patersons in the island of Uffa, and finally of the
Camberwell poisoning case. In the latter, as may be remembered,
Sherlock Holmes was able, by winding up the dead man's watch, to
prove that it had been wound up two hours before, and that
therefore the deceased had gone to bed within that time--a
deduction which was of the greatest importance in clearing up the
case. All these I may sketch out at some future date, but none of
them present such singular features as the strange train of
circumstances which I have now taken up my pen to describe.

It was in the latter days of September, and the equinoctial gales
had set in with exceptional violence. All day the wind had
screamed and the rain had beaten against the windows, so that
even here in the heart of great, hand-made London we were forced
to raise our minds for the instant from the routine of life and
to recognise the presence of those great elemental forces which
shriek at mankind through the bars of his civilisation, like
untamed beasts in a cage. As evening drew in, the storm grew
higher and louder, and the wind cried and sobbed like a child in
the chimney. Sherlock Holmes sat moodily at one side of the
fireplace cross-indexing his records of crime, while I at the
other was deep in one of Clark Russell's fine sea-stories until
the howl of the gale from without seemed to blend with the text,
and the splash of the rain to lengthen out into the long swash of
the sea waves. My wife was on a visit to her mother's, and for a
few days I was a dweller once more in my old quarters at Baker
Street.

"Why," said I, glancing up at my companion, "that was surely the
bell. Who could come to-night? Some friend of yours, perhaps?"

"Except yourself I have none," he answered. "I do not encourage
visitors."

"A client, then?"

"If so, it is a serious case. Nothing less would bring a man out
on such a day and at such an hour. But I take it that it is more
likely to be some crony of the landlady's."

Sherlock Holmes was wrong in his conjecture, however, for there
came a step in the passage and a tapping at the door. He
stretched out his long arm to turn the lamp away from himself and
towards the vacant chair upon which a newcomer must sit.

"Come in!" said he.

The man who entered was young, some two-and-twenty at the
outside, well-groomed and trimly clad, with something of
refinement and delicacy in his bearing. The streaming umbrella
which he held in his hand, and his long shining waterproof told
of the fierce weather through which he had come. He looked about
him anxiously in the glare of the lamp, and I could see that his
face was pale and his eyes heavy, like those of a man who is
weighed down with some great anxiety.

"I owe you an apology," he said, raising his golden pince-nez to
his eyes. "I trust that I am not intruding. I fear that I have
brought some traces of the storm and rain into your snug
chamber."

"Give me your coat and umbrella," said Holmes. "They may rest
here on the hook and will be dry presently. You have come up from
the south-west, I see."

"Yes, from Horsham."

"That clay and chalk mixture which I see upon your toe caps is
quite distinctive."

"I have come for advice."

"That is easily got."

"And help."

"That is not always so easy."

"I have heard of you, Mr. Holmes. I heard from Major Prendergast
how you saved him in the Tankerville Club scandal."

"Ah, of course. He was wrongfully accused of cheating at cards."

"He said that you could solve anything."

"He said too much."

"That you are never beaten."

"I have been beaten four times--three times by men, and once by a
woman."

"But what is that compared with the number of your successes?"

"It is true that I have been generally successful."

"Then you may be so with me."

"I beg that you will draw your chair up to the fire and favour me
with some details as to your case."

"It is no ordinary one."

"None of those which come to me are. I am the last court of
appeal."

"And yet I question, sir, whether, in all your experience, you
have ever listened to a more mysterious and inexplicable chain of
events than those which have happened in my own family."

"You fill me with interest," said Holmes. "Pray give us the
essential facts from the commencement, and I can afterwards
question you as to those details which seem to me to be most
important."

The young man pulled his chair up and pushed his wet feet out
towards the blaze.

"My name," said he, "is John Openshaw, but my own affairs have,
as far as I can understand, little to do with this awful
business. It is a hereditary matter; so in order to give you an
idea of the facts, I must go back to the commencement of the
affair.

"You must know that my grandfather had two sons--my uncle Elias
and my father Joseph. My father had a small factory at Coventry,
which he enlarged at the time of the invention of bicycling. He
was a patentee of the Openshaw unbreakable tire, and his business
met with such success that he was able to sell it and to retire
upon a handsome competence.

"My uncle Elias emigrated to America when he was a young man and
became a planter in Florida, where he was reported to have done
very well. At the time of the war he fought in Jackson's army,
and afterwards under Hood, where he rose to be a colonel. When
Lee laid down his arms my uncle returned to his plantation, where
he remained for three or four years. About 1869 or 1870 he came
back to Europe and took a small estate in Sussex, near Horsham.
He had made a very considerable fortune in the States, and his
reason for leaving them was his aversion to the negroes, and his
dislike of the Republican policy in extending the franchise to
them. He was a singular man, fierce and quick-tempered, very
foul-mouthed when he was angry, and of a most retiring
disposition. During all the years that he lived at Horsham, I
doubt if ever he set foot in the town. He had a garden and two or
three fields round his house, and there he would take his
exercise, though very often for weeks on end he would never leave
his room. He drank a great deal of brandy and smoked very
heavily, but he would see no society and did not want any
friends, not even his own brother.

"He didn't mind me; in fact, he took a fancy to me, for at the
time when he saw me first I was a youngster of twelve or so. This
would be in the year 1878, after he had been eight or nine years
in England. He begged my father to let me live with him and he
was very kind to me in his way. When he was sober he used to be
fond of playing backgammon and draughts with me, and he would
make me his representative both with the servants and with the
tradespeople, so that by the time that I was sixteen I was quite
master of the house. I kept all the keys and could go where I
liked and do what I liked, so long as I did not disturb him in
his privacy. There was one singular exception, however, for he
had a single room, a lumber-room up among the attics, which was
invariably locked, and which he would never permit either me or
anyone else to enter. With a boy's curiosity I have peeped
through the keyhole, but I was never able to see more than such a
collection of old trunks and bundles as would be expected in such
a room.

"One day--it was in March, 1883--a letter with a foreign stamp
lay upon the table in front of the colonel's plate. It was not a
common thing for him to receive letters, for his bills were all
paid in ready money, and he had no friends of any sort. 'From
India!' said he as he took it up, 'Pondicherry postmark! What can
this be?' Opening it hurriedly, out there jumped five little
dried orange pips, which pattered down upon his plate. I began to
laugh at this, but the laugh was struck from my lips at the sight
of his face. His lip had fallen, his eyes were protruding, his
skin the colour of putty, and he glared at the envelope which he
still held in his trembling hand, 'K. K. K.!' he shrieked, and
then, 'My God, my God, my sins have overtaken me!'

"'What is it, uncle?' I cried.

"'Death,' said he, and rising from the table he retired to his
room, leaving me palpitating with horror. I took up the envelope
and saw scrawled in red ink upon the inner flap, just above the
gum, the letter K three times repeated. There was nothing else
save the five dried pips. What could be the reason of his
overpowering terror? I left the breakfast-table, and as I
ascended the stair I met him coming down with an old rusty key,
which must have belonged to the attic, in one hand, and a small
brass box, like a cashbox, in the other.

"'They may do what they like, but I'll checkmate them still,'
said he with an oath. 'Tell Mary that I shall want a fire in my
room to-day, and send down to Fordham, the Horsham lawyer.'

"I did as he ordered, and when the lawyer arrived I was asked to
step up to the room. The fire was burning brightly, and in the
grate there was a mass of black, fluffy ashes, as of burned
paper, while the brass box stood open and empty beside it. As I
glanced at the box I noticed, with a start, that upon the lid was
printed the treble K which I had read in the morning upon the
envelope.

"'I wish you, John,' said my uncle, 'to witness my will. I leave
my estate, with all its advantages and all its disadvantages, to
my brother, your father, whence it will, no doubt, descend to
you. If you can enjoy it in peace, well and good! If you find you
cannot, take my advice, my boy, and leave it to your deadliest
enemy. I am sorry to give you such a two-edged thing, but I can't
say what turn things are going to take. Kindly sign the paper
where Mr. Fordham shows you.'

"I signed the paper as directed, and the lawyer took it away with
him. The singular incident made, as you may think, the deepest
impression upon me, and I pondered over it and turned it every
way in my mind without being able to make anything of it. Yet I
could not shake off the vague feeling of dread which it left
behind, though the sensation grew less keen as the weeks passed
and nothing happened to disturb the usual routine of our lives. I
could see a change in my uncle, however. He drank more than ever,
and he was less inclined for any sort of society. Most of his
time he would spend in his room, with the door locked upon the
inside, but sometimes he would emerge in a sort of drunken frenzy
and would burst out of the house and tear about the garden with a
revolver in his hand, screaming out that he was afraid of no man,
and that he was not to be cooped up, like a sheep in a pen, by
man or devil. When these hot fits were over, however, he would
rush tumultuously in at the door and lock and bar it behind him,
like a man who can brazen it out no longer against the terror
which lies at the roots of his soul. At such times I have seen
his face, even on a cold day, glisten with moisture, as though it
were new raised from a basin.

"Well, to come to an end of the matter, Mr. Holmes, and not to
abuse your patience, there came a night when he made one of those
drunken sallies from which he never came back. We found him, when
we went to search for him, face downward in a little
green-scummed pool, which lay at the foot of the garden. There
was no sign of any violence, and the water was but two feet deep,
so that the jury, having regard to his known eccentricity,
brought in a verdict of 'suicide.' But I, who knew how he winced
from the very thought of death, had much ado to persuade myself
that he had gone out of his way to meet it. The matter passed,
however, and my father entered into possession of the estate, and
of some 14,000 pounds, which lay to his credit at the bank."

"One moment," Holmes interposed, "your statement is, I foresee,
one of the most remarkable to which I have ever listened. Let me
have the date of the reception by your uncle of the letter, and
the date of his supposed suicide."

"The letter arrived on March 10, 1883. His death was seven weeks
later, upon the night of May 2nd."

"Thank you. Pray proceed."

"When my father took over the Horsham property, he, at my
request, made a careful examination of the attic, which had been
always locked up. We found the brass box there, although its
contents had been destroyed. On the inside of the cover was a
paper label, with the initials of K. K. K. repeated upon it, and
'Letters, memoranda, receipts, and a register' written beneath.
These, we presume, indicated the nature of the papers which had
been destroyed by Colonel Openshaw. For the rest, there was
nothing of much importance in the attic save a great many
scattered papers and note-books bearing upon my uncle's life in
America. Some of them were of the war time and showed that he had
done his duty well and had borne the repute of a brave soldier.
Others were of a date during the reconstruction of the Southern
states, and were mostly concerned with politics, for he had
evidently taken a strong part in opposing the carpet-bag
politicians who had been sent down from the North.

"Well, it was the beginning of '84 when my father came to live at
Horsham, and all went as well as possible with us until the
January of '85. On the fourth day after the new year I heard my
father give a sharp cry of surprise as we sat together at the
breakfast-table. There he was, sitting with a newly opened
envelope in one hand and five dried orange pips in the
outstretched palm of the other one. He had always laughed at what
he called my cock-and-bull story about the colonel, but he looked
very scared and puzzled now that the same thing had come upon
himself.

"'Why, what on earth does this mean, John?' he stammered.

"My heart had turned to lead. 'It is K. K. K.,' said I.

"He looked inside the envelope. 'So it is,' he cried. 'Here are
the very letters. But what is this written above them?'

"'Put the papers on the sundial,' I read, peeping over his
shoulder.

"'What papers? What sundial?' he asked.

"'The sundial in the garden. There is no other,' said I; 'but the
papers must be those that are destroyed.'

"'Pooh!' said he, gripping hard at his courage. 'We are in a
civilised land here, and we can't have tomfoolery of this kind.
Where does the thing come from?'

"'From Dundee,' I answered, glancing at the postmark.

"'Some preposterous practical joke,' said he. 'What have I to do
with sundials and papers? I shall take no notice of such
nonsense.'

"'I should certainly speak to the police,' I said.

"'And be laughed at for my pains. Nothing of the sort.'

"'Then let me do so?'

"'No, I forbid you. I won't have a fuss made about such
nonsense.'

"It was in vain to argue with him, for he was a very obstinate
man. I went about, however, with a heart which was full of
forebodings.

"On the third day after the coming of the letter my father went
from home to visit an old friend of his, Major Freebody, who is
in command of one of the forts upon Portsdown Hill. I was glad
that he should go, for it seemed to me that he was farther from
danger when he was away from home. In that, however, I was in
error. Upon the second day of his absence I received a telegram
from the major, imploring me to come at once. My father had
fallen over one of the deep chalk-pits which abound in the
neighbourhood, and was lying senseless, with a shattered skull. I
hurried to him, but he passed away without having ever recovered
his consciousness. He had, as it appears, been returning from
Fareham in the twilight, and as the country was unknown to him,
and the chalk-pit unfenced, the jury had no hesitation in
bringing in a verdict of 'death from accidental causes.'
Carefully as I examined every fact connected with his death, I
was unable to find anything which could suggest the idea of
murder. There were no signs of violence, no footmarks, no
robbery, no record of strangers having been seen upon the roads.
And yet I need not tell you that my mind was far from at ease,
and that I was well-nigh certain that some foul plot had been
woven round him.

"In this sinister way I came into my inheritance. You will ask me
why I did not dispose of it? I answer, because I was well
convinced that our troubles were in some way dependent upon an
incident in my uncle's life, and that the danger would be as
pressing in one house as in another.

"It was in January, '85, that my poor father met his end, and two
years and eight months have elapsed since then. During that time
I have lived happily at Horsham, and I had begun to hope that
this curse had passed away from the family, and that it had ended
with the last generation. I had begun to take comfort too soon,
however; yesterday morning the blow fell in the very shape in
which it had come upon my father."

The young man took from his waistcoat a crumpled envelope, and
turning to the table he shook out upon it five little dried
orange pips.

"This is the envelope," he continued. "The postmark is
London--eastern division. Within are the very words which were
upon my father's last message: 'K. K. K.'; and then 'Put the
papers on the sundial.'"

"What have you done?" asked Holmes.

"Nothing."

"Nothing?"

"To tell the truth"--he sank his face into his thin, white
hands--"I have felt helpless. I have felt like one of those poor
rabbits when the snake is writhing towards it. I seem to be in
the grasp of some resistless, inexorable evil, which no foresight
and no precautions can guard against."

"Tut! tut!" cried Sherlock Holmes. "You must act, man, or you are
lost. Nothing but energy can save you. This is no time for
despair."

"I have seen the police."

"Ah!"

"But they listened to my story with a smile. I am convinced that
the inspector has formed the opinion that the letters are all
practical jokes, and that the deaths of my relations were really
accidents, as the jury stated, and were not to be connected with
the warnings."

Holmes shook his clenched hands in the air. "Incredible
imbecility!" he cried.

"They have, however, allowed me a policeman, who may remain in
the house with me."

"Has he come with you to-night?"

"No. His orders were to stay in the house."

Again Holmes raved in the air.

"Why did you come to me," he cried, "and, above all, why did you
not come at once?"

"I did not know. It was only to-day that I spoke to Major
Prendergast about my troubles and was advised by him to come to
you."

"It is really two days since you had the letter. We should have
acted before this. You have no further evidence, I suppose, than
that which you have placed before us--no suggestive detail which
might help us?"

"There is one thing," said John Openshaw. He rummaged in his coat
pocket, and, drawing out a piece of discoloured, blue-tinted
paper, he laid it out upon the table. "I have some remembrance,"
said he, "that on the day when my uncle burned the papers I
observed that the small, unburned margins which lay amid the
ashes were of this particular colour. I found this single sheet
upon the floor of his room, and I am inclined to think that it
may be one of the papers which has, perhaps, fluttered out from
among the others, and in that way has escaped destruction. Beyond
the mention of pips, I do not see that it helps us much. I think
myself that it is a page from some private diary. The writing is
undoubtedly my uncle's."

Holmes moved the lamp, and we both bent over the sheet of paper,
which showed by its ragged edge that it had indeed been torn from
a book. It was headed, "March, 1869," and beneath were the
following enigmatical notices:

"4th. Hudson came. Same old platform.

"7th. Set the pips on McCauley, Paramore, and
      John Swain, of St. Augustine.

"9th. McCauley cleared.

"10th. John Swain cleared.

"12th. Visited Paramore. All well."

"Thank you!" said Holmes, folding up the paper and returning it
to our visitor. "And now you must on no account lose another
instant. We cannot spare time even to discuss what you have told
me. You must get home instantly and act."

"What shall I do?"

"There is but one thing to do. It must be done at once. You must
put this piece of paper which you have shown us into the brass
box which you have described. You must also put in a note to say
that all the other papers were burned by your uncle, and that
this is the only one which remains. You must assert that in such
words as will carry conviction with them. Having done this, you
must at once put the box out upon the sundial, as directed. Do
you understand?"

"Entirely."

"Do not think of revenge, or anything of the sort, at present. I
think that we may gain that by means of the law; but we have our
web to weave, while theirs is already woven. The first
consideration is to remove the pressing danger which threatens
you. The second is to clear up the mystery and to punish the
guilty parties."

"I thank you," said the young man, rising and pulling on his
overcoat. "You have given me fresh life and hope. I shall
certainly do as you advise."

"Do not lose an instant. And, above all, take care of yourself in
the meanwhile, for I do not think that there can be a doubt that
you are threatened by a very real and imminent danger. How do you
go back?"

"By train from Waterloo."

"It is not yet nine. The streets will be crowded, so I trust that
you may be in safety. And yet you cannot guard yourself too
closely."

"I am armed."

"That is well. To-morrow I shall set to work upon your case."

"I shall see you at Horsham, then?"

"No, your secret lies in London. It is there that I shall seek
it."

"Then I shall call upon you in a day, or in two days, with news
as to the box and the papers. I shall take your advice in every
particular." He shook hands with us and took his leave. Outside
the wind still screamed and the rain splashed and pattered
against the windows. This strange, wild story seemed to have come
to us from amid the mad elements--blown in upon us like a sheet
of sea-weed in a gale--and now to have been reabsorbed by them
once more.

Sherlock Holmes sat for some time in silence, with his head sunk
forward and his eyes bent upon the red glow of the fire. Then he
lit his pipe, and leaning back in his chair he watched the blue
smoke-rings as they chased each other up to the ceiling.

"I think, Watson," he remarked at last, "that of all our cases we
have had none more fantastic than this."

"Save, perhaps, the Sign of Four."

"Well, yes. Save, perhaps, that. And yet this John Openshaw seems
to me to be walking amid even greater perils than did the
Sholtos."

"But have you," I asked, "formed any definite conception as to
what these perils are?"

"There can be no question as to their nature," he answered.

"Then what are they? Who is this K. K. K., and why does he pursue
this unhappy family?"

Sherlock Holmes closed his eyes and placed his elbows upon the
arms of his chair, with his finger-tips together. "The ideal
reasoner," he remarked, "would, when he had once been shown a
single fact in all its bearings, deduce from it not only all the
chain of events which led up to it but also all the results which
would follow from it. As Cuvier could correctly describe a whole
animal by the contemplation of a single bone, so the observer who
has thoroughly understood one link in a series of incidents
should be able to accurately state all the other ones, both
before and after. We have not yet grasped the results which the
reason alone can attain to. Problems may be solved in the study
which have baffled all those who have sought a solution by the
aid of their senses. To carry the art, however, to its highest
pitch, it is necessary that the reasoner should be able to
utilise all the facts which have come to his knowledge; and this
in itself implies, as you will readily see, a possession of all
knowledge, which, even in these days of free education and
encyclopaedias, is a somewhat rare accomplishment. It is not so
impossible, however, that a man should possess all knowledge
which is likely to be useful to him in his work, and this I have
endeavoured in my case to do. If I remember rightly, you on one
occasion, in the early days of our friendship, defined my limits
in a very precise fashion."

"Yes," I answered, laughing. "It was a singular document.
Philosophy, astronomy, and politics were marked at zero, I
remember. Botany variable, geology profound as regards the
mud-stains from any region within fifty miles of town, chemistry
eccentric, anatomy unsystematic, sensational literature and crime
records unique, violin-player, boxer, swordsman, lawyer, and
self-poisoner by cocaine and tobacco. Those, I think, were the
main points of my analysis."

Holmes grinned at the last item. "Well," he said, "I say now, as
I said then, that a man should keep his little brain-attic
stocked with all the furniture that he is likely to use, and the
rest he can put away in the lumber-room of his library, where he
can get it if he wants it. Now, for such a case as the one which
has been submitted to us to-night, we need certainly to muster
all our resources. Kindly hand me down the letter K of the
'American Encyclopaedia' which stands upon the shelf beside you.
Thank you. Now let us consider the situation and see what may be
deduced from it. In the first place, we may start with a strong
presumption that Colonel Openshaw had some very strong reason for
leaving America. Men at his time of life do not change all their
habits and exchange willingly the charming climate of Florida for
the lonely life of an English provincial town. His extreme love
of solitude in England suggests the idea that he was in fear of
someone or something, so we may assume as a working hypothesis
that it was fear of someone or something which drove him from
America. As to what it was he feared, we can only deduce that by
considering the formidable letters which were received by himself
and his successors. Did you remark the postmarks of those
letters?"

"The first was from Pondicherry, the second from Dundee, and the
third from London."

"From East London. What do you deduce from that?"

"They are all seaports. That the writer was on board of a ship."

"Excellent. We have already a clue. There can be no doubt that
the probability--the strong probability--is that the writer was
on board of a ship. And now let us consider another point. In the
case of Pondicherry, seven weeks elapsed between the threat and
its fulfilment, in Dundee it was only some three or four days.
Does that suggest anything?"

"A greater distance to travel."

"But the letter had also a greater distance to come."

"Then I do not see the point."

"There is at least a presumption that the vessel in which the man
or men are is a sailing-ship. It looks as if they always send
their singular warning or token before them when starting upon
their mission. You see how quickly the deed followed the sign
when it came from Dundee. If they had come from Pondicherry in a
steamer they would have arrived almost as soon as their letter.
But, as a matter of fact, seven weeks elapsed. I think that those
seven weeks represented the difference between the mail-boat which
brought the letter and the sailing vessel which brought the
writer."

"It is possible."

"More than that. It is probable. And now you see the deadly
urgency of this new case, and why I urged young Openshaw to
caution. The blow has always fallen at the end of the time which
it would take the senders to travel the distance. But this one
comes from London, and therefore we cannot count upon delay."

"Good God!" I cried. "What can it mean, this relentless
persecution?"

"The papers which Openshaw carried are obviously of vital
importance to the person or persons in the sailing-ship. I think
that it is quite clear that there must be more than one of them.
A single man could not have carried out two deaths in such a way
as to deceive a coroner's jury. There must have been several in
it, and they must have been men of resource and determination.
Their papers they mean to have, be the holder of them who it may.
In this way you see K. K. K. ceases to be the initials of an
individual and becomes the badge of a society."

"But of what society?"

"Have you never--" said Sherlock Holmes, bending forward and
sinking his voice--"have you never heard of the Ku Klux Klan?"

"I never have."

Holmes turned over the leaves of the book upon his knee. "Here it
is," said he presently:

"'Ku Klux Klan. A name derived from the fanciful resemblance to
the sound produced by cocking a rifle. This terrible secret
society was formed by some ex-Confederate soldiers in the
Southern states after the Civil War, and it rapidly formed local
branches in different parts of the country, notably in Tennessee,
Louisiana, the Carolinas, Georgia, and Florida. Its power was
used for political purposes, principally for the terrorising of
the negro voters and the murdering and driving from the country
of those who were opposed to its views. Its outrages were usually
preceded by a warning sent to the marked man in some fantastic
but generally recognised shape--a sprig of oak-leaves in some
parts, melon seeds or orange pips in others. On receiving this
the victim might either openly abjure his former ways, or might
fly from the country. If he braved the matter out, death would
unfailingly come upon him, and usually in some strange and
unforeseen manner. So perfect was the organisation of the
society, and so systematic its methods, that there is hardly a
case upon record where any man succeeded in braving it with
impunity, or in which any of its outrages were traced home to the
perpetrators. For some years the organisation flourished in spite
of the efforts of the United States government and of the better
classes of the community in the South. Eventually, in the year
1869, the movement rather suddenly collapsed, although there have
been sporadic outbreaks of the same sort since that date.'

"You will observe," said Holmes, laying down the volume, "that
the sudden breaking up of the society was coincident with the
disappearance of Openshaw from America with their papers. It may
well have been cause and effect. It is no wonder that he and his
family have some of the more implacable spirits upon their track.
You can understand that this register and diary may implicate
some of the first men in the South, and that there may be many
who will not sleep easy at night until it is recovered."

"Then the page we have seen--"

"Is such as we might expect. It ran, if I remember right, 'sent
the pips to A, B, and C'--that is, sent the society's warning to
them. Then there are successive entries that A and B cleared, or
left the country, and finally that C was visited, with, I fear, a
sinister result for C. Well, I think, Doctor, that we may let
some light into this dark place, and I believe that the only
chance young Openshaw has in the meantime is to do what I have
told him. There is nothing more to be said or to be done
to-night, so hand me over my violin and let us try to forget for
half an hour the miserable weather and the still more miserable
ways of our fellow-men."


It had cleared in the morning, and the sun was shining with a
subdued brightness through the dim veil which hangs over the
great city. Sherlock Holmes was already at breakfast when I came
down.

"You will excuse me for not waiting for you," said he; "I have, I
foresee, a very busy day before me in looking into this case of
young Openshaw's."

"What steps will you take?" I asked.

"It will very much depend upon the results of my first inquiries.
I may have to go down to Horsham, after all."

"You will not go there first?"

"No, I shall commence with the City. Just ring the bell and the
maid will bring up your coffee."

As I waited, I lifted the unopened newspaper from the table and
glanced my eye over it. It rested upon a heading which sent a
chill to my heart.

"Holmes," I cried, "you are too late."

"Ah!" said he, laying down his cup, "I feared as much. How was it
done?" He spoke calmly, but I could see that he was deeply moved.

"My eye caught the name of Openshaw, and the heading 'Tragedy
Near Waterloo Bridge.' Here is the account:

"Between nine and ten last night Police-Constable Cook, of the H
Division, on duty near Waterloo Bridge, heard a cry for help and
a splash in the water. The night, however, was extremely dark and
stormy, so that, in spite of the help of several passers-by, it
was quite impossible to effect a rescue. The alarm, however, was
given, and, by the aid of the water-police, the body was
eventually recovered. It proved to be that of a young gentleman
whose name, as it appears from an envelope which was found in his
pocket, was John Openshaw, and whose residence is near Horsham.
It is conjectured that he may have been hurrying down to catch
the last train from Waterloo Station, and that in his haste and
the extreme darkness he missed his path and walked over the edge
of one of the small landing-places for river steamboats. The body
exhibited no traces of violence, and there can be no doubt that
the deceased had been the victim of an unfortunate accident,
which should have the effect of calling the attention of the
authorities to the condition of the riverside landing-stages."

We sat in silence for some minutes, Holmes more depressed and
shaken than I had ever seen him.

"That hurts my pride, Watson," he said at last. "It is a petty
feeling, no doubt, but it hurts my pride. It becomes a personal
matter with me now, and, if God sends me health, I shall set my
hand upon this gang. That he should come to me for help, and that
I should send him away to his death--!" He sprang from his chair
and paced about the room in uncontrollable agitation, with a
flush upon his sallow cheeks and a nervous clasping and
unclasping of his long thin hands.

"They must be cunning devils," he exclaimed at last. "How could
they have decoyed him down there? The Embankment is not on the
direct line to the station. The bridge, no doubt, was too
crowded, even on such a night, for their purpose. Well, Watson,
we shall see who will win in the long run. I am going out now!"

"To the police?"

"No; I shall be my own police. When I have spun the web they may
take the flies, but not before."

All day I was engaged in my professional work, and it was late in
the evening before I returned to Baker Street. Sherlock Holmes
had not come back yet. It was nearly ten o'clock before he
entered, looking pale and worn. He walked up to the sideboard,
and tearing a piece from the loaf he devoured it voraciously,
washing it down with a long draught of water.

"You are hungry," I remarked.

"Starving. It had escaped my memory. I have had nothing since
breakfast."

"Nothing?"

"Not a bite. I had no time to think of it."

"And how have you succeeded?"

"Well."

"You have a clue?"

"I have them in the hollow of my hand. Young Openshaw shall not
long remain unavenged. Why, Watson, let us put their own devilish
trade-mark upon them. It is well thought of!"

"What do you mean?"

He took an orange from the cupboard, and tearing it to pieces he
squeezed out the pips upon the table. Of these he took five and
thrust them into an envelope. On the inside of the flap he wrote
"S. H. for J. O." Then he sealed it and addressed it to "Captain
James Calhoun, Barque 'Lone Star,' Savannah, Georgia."

"That will await him when he enters port," said he, chuckling.
"It may give him a sleepless night. He will find it as sure a
precursor of his fate as Openshaw did before him."

"And who is this Captain Calhoun?"

"The leader of the gang. I shall have the others, but he first."

"How did you trace it, then?"

He took a large sheet of paper from his pocket, all covered with
dates and names.

"I have spent the whole day," said he, "over Lloyd's registers
and files of the old papers, following the future career of every
vessel which touched at Pondicherry in January and February in
'83. There were thirty-six ships of fair tonnage which were
reported there during those months. Of these, one, the 'Lone Star,'
instantly attracted my attention, since, although it was reported
as having cleared from London, the name is that which is given to
one of the states of the Union."

"Texas, I think."

"I was not and am not sure which; but I knew that the ship must
have an American origin."

"What then?"

"I searched the Dundee records, and when I found that the barque
'Lone Star' was there in January, '85, my suspicion became a
certainty. I then inquired as to the vessels which lay at present
in the port of London."

"Yes?"

"The 'Lone Star' had arrived here last week. I went down to the
Albert Dock and found that she had been taken down the river by
the early tide this morning, homeward bound to Savannah. I wired
to Gravesend and learned that she had passed some time ago, and
as the wind is easterly I have no doubt that she is now past the
Goodwins and not very far from the Isle of Wight."

"What will you do, then?"

"Oh, I have my hand upon him. He and the two mates, are as I
learn, the only native-born Americans in the ship. The others are
Finns and Germans. I know, also, that they were all three away
from the ship last night. I had it from the stevedore who has
been loading their cargo. By the time that their sailing-ship
reaches Savannah the mail-boat will have carried this letter, and
the cable will have informed the police of Savannah that these
three gentlemen are badly wanted here upon a charge of murder."

There is ever a flaw, however, in the best laid of human plans,
and the murderers of John Openshaw were never to receive the
orange pips which would show them that another, as cunning and as
resolute as themselves, was upon their track. Very long and very
severe were the equinoctial gales that year. We waited long for
news of the "Lone Star" of Savannah, but none ever reached us. We
did at last hear that somewhere far out in the Atlantic a
shattered stern-post of a boat was seen swinging in the trough
of a wave, with the letters "L. S." carved upon it, and that is
all which we shall ever know of the fate of the "Lone Star."



ADVENTURE VI. THE MAN WITH THE TWISTED LIP

Isa Whitney, brother of the late Elias Whitney, D.D., Principal
of the Theological College of St. George's, was much addicted to
opium. The habit grew upon him, as I understand, from some
foolish freak when he was at college; for having read De
Quincey's description of his dreams and sensations, he had
drenched his tobacco with laudanum in an attempt to produce the
same effects. He found, as so many more have done, that the
practice is easier to attain than to get rid of, and for many
years he continued to be a slave to the drug, an object of
mingled horror and pity to his friends and relatives. I can see
him now, with yellow, pasty face, drooping lids, and pin-point
pupils, all huddled in a chair, the wreck and ruin of a noble
man.

One night--it was in June, '89--there came a ring to my bell,
about the hour when a man gives his first yawn and glances at the
clock. I sat up in my chair, and my wife laid her needle-work
down in her lap and made a little face of disappointment.

"A patient!" said she. "You'll have to go out."

I groaned, for I was newly come back from a weary day.

We heard the door open, a few hurried words, and then quick steps
upon the linoleum. Our own door flew open, and a lady, clad in
some dark-coloured stuff, with a black veil, entered the room.

"You will excuse my calling so late," she began, and then,
suddenly losing her self-control, she ran forward, threw her arms
about my wife's neck, and sobbed upon her shoulder. "Oh, I'm in
such trouble!" she cried; "I do so want a little help."

"Why," said my wife, pulling up her veil, "it is Kate Whitney.
How you startled me, Kate! I had not an idea who you were when
you came in."

"I didn't know what to do, so I came straight to you." That was
always the way. Folk who were in grief came to my wife like birds
to a light-house.

"It was very sweet of you to come. Now, you must have some wine
and water, and sit here comfortably and tell us all about it. Or
should you rather that I sent James off to bed?"

"Oh, no, no! I want the doctor's advice and help, too. It's about
Isa. He has not been home for two days. I am so frightened about
him!"

It was not the first time that she had spoken to us of her
husband's trouble, to me as a doctor, to my wife as an old friend
and school companion. We soothed and comforted her by such words
as we could find. Did she know where her husband was? Was it
possible that we could bring him back to her?

It seems that it was. She had the surest information that of late
he had, when the fit was on him, made use of an opium den in the
farthest east of the City. Hitherto his orgies had always been
confined to one day, and he had come back, twitching and
shattered, in the evening. But now the spell had been upon him
eight-and-forty hours, and he lay there, doubtless among the
dregs of the docks, breathing in the poison or sleeping off the
effects. There he was to be found, she was sure of it, at the Bar
of Gold, in Upper Swandam Lane. But what was she to do? How could
she, a young and timid woman, make her way into such a place and
pluck her husband out from among the ruffians who surrounded him?

There was the case, and of course there was but one way out of
it. Might I not escort her to this place? And then, as a second
thought, why should she come at all? I was Isa Whitney's medical
adviser, and as such I had influence over him. I could manage it
better if I were alone. I promised her on my word that I would
send him home in a cab within two hours if he were indeed at the
address which she had given me. And so in ten minutes I had left
my armchair and cheery sitting-room behind me, and was speeding
eastward in a hansom on a strange errand, as it seemed to me at
the time, though the future only could show how strange it was to
be.

But there was no great difficulty in the first stage of my
adventure. Upper Swandam Lane is a vile alley lurking behind the
high wharves which line the north side of the river to the east
of London Bridge. Between a slop-shop and a gin-shop, approached
by a steep flight of steps leading down to a black gap like the
mouth of a cave, I found the den of which I was in search.
Ordering my cab to wait, I passed down the steps, worn hollow in
the centre by the ceaseless tread of drunken feet; and by the
light of a flickering oil-lamp above the door I found the latch
and made my way into a long, low room, thick and heavy with the
brown opium smoke, and terraced with wooden berths, like the
forecastle of an emigrant ship.

Through the gloom one could dimly catch a glimpse of bodies lying
in strange fantastic poses, bowed shoulders, bent knees, heads
thrown back, and chins pointing upward, with here and there a
dark, lack-lustre eye turned upon the newcomer. Out of the black
shadows there glimmered little red circles of light, now bright,
now faint, as the burning poison waxed or waned in the bowls of
the metal pipes. The most lay silent, but some muttered to
themselves, and others talked together in a strange, low,
monotonous voice, their conversation coming in gushes, and then
suddenly tailing off into silence, each mumbling out his own
thoughts and paying little heed to the words of his neighbour. At
the farther end was a small brazier of burning charcoal, beside
which on a three-legged wooden stool there sat a tall, thin old
man, with his jaw resting upon his two fists, and his elbows upon
his knees, staring into the fire.

As I entered, a sallow Malay attendant had hurried up with a pipe
for me and a supply of the drug, beckoning me to an empty berth.

"Thank you. I have not come to stay," said I. "There is a friend
of mine here, Mr. Isa Whitney, and I wish to speak with him."

There was a movement and an exclamation from my right, and
peering through the gloom, I saw Whitney, pale, haggard, and
unkempt, staring out at me.

"My God! It's Watson," said he. He was in a pitiable state of
reaction, with every nerve in a twitter. "I say, Watson, what
o'clock is it?"

"Nearly eleven."

"Of what day?"

"Of Friday, June 19th."

"Good heavens! I thought it was Wednesday. It is Wednesday. What
d'you want to frighten a chap for?" He sank his face onto his
arms and began to sob in a high treble key.

"I tell you that it is Friday, man. Your wife has been waiting
this two days for you. You should be ashamed of yourself!"

"So I am. But you've got mixed, Watson, for I have only been here
a few hours, three pipes, four pipes--I forget how many. But I'll
go home with you. I wouldn't frighten Kate--poor little Kate.
Give me your hand! Have you a cab?"

"Yes, I have one waiting."

"Then I shall go in it. But I must owe something. Find what I
owe, Watson. I am all off colour. I can do nothing for myself."

I walked down the narrow passage between the double row of
sleepers, holding my breath to keep out the vile, stupefying
fumes of the drug, and looking about for the manager. As I passed
the tall man who sat by the brazier I felt a sudden pluck at my
skirt, and a low voice whispered, "Walk past me, and then look
back at me." The words fell quite distinctly upon my ear. I
glanced down. They could only have come from the old man at my
side, and yet he sat now as absorbed as ever, very thin, very
wrinkled, bent with age, an opium pipe dangling down from between
his knees, as though it had dropped in sheer lassitude from his
fingers. I took two steps forward and looked back. It took all my
self-control to prevent me from breaking out into a cry of
astonishment. He had turned his back so that none could see him
but I. His form had filled out, his wrinkles were gone, the dull
eyes had regained their fire, and there, sitting by the fire and
grinning at my surprise, was none other than Sherlock Holmes. He
made a slight motion to me to approach him, and instantly, as he
turned his face half round to the company once more, subsided
into a doddering, loose-lipped senility.

"Holmes!" I whispered, "what on earth are you doing in this den?"

"As low as you can," he answered; "I have excellent ears. If you
would have the great kindness to get rid of that sottish friend
of yours I should be exceedingly glad to have a little talk with
you."

"I have a cab outside."

"Then pray send him home in it. You may safely trust him, for he
appears to be too limp to get into any mischief. I should
recommend you also to send a note by the cabman to your wife to
say that you have thrown in your lot with me. If you will wait
outside, I shall be with you in five minutes."

It was difficult to refuse any of Sherlock Holmes' requests, for
they were always so exceedingly definite, and put forward with
such a quiet air of mastery. I felt, however, that when Whitney
was once confined in the cab my mission was practically
accomplished; and for the rest, I could not wish anything better
than to be associated with my friend in one of those singular
adventures which were the normal condition of his existence. In a
few minutes I had written my note, paid Whitney's bill, led him
out to the cab, and seen him driven through the darkness. In a
very short time a decrepit figure had emerged from the opium den,
and I was walking down the street with Sherlock Holmes. For two
streets he shuffled along with a bent back and an uncertain foot.
Then, glancing quickly round, he straightened himself out and
burst into a hearty fit of laughter.

"I suppose, Watson," said he, "that you imagine that I have added
opium-smoking to cocaine injections, and all the other little
weaknesses on which you have favoured me with your medical
views."

"I was certainly surprised to find you there."

"But not more so than I to find you."

"I came to find a friend."

"And I to find an enemy."

"An enemy?"

"Yes; one of my natural enemies, or, shall I say, my natural
prey. Briefly, Watson, I am in the midst of a very remarkable
inquiry, and I have hoped to find a clue in the incoherent
ramblings of these sots, as I have done before now. Had I been
recognised in that den my life would not have been worth an
hour's purchase; for I have used it before now for my own
purposes, and the rascally Lascar who runs it has sworn to have
vengeance upon me. There is a trap-door at the back of that
building, near the corner of Paul's Wharf, which could tell some
strange tales of what has passed through it upon the moonless
nights."

"What! You do not mean bodies?"

"Ay, bodies, Watson. We should be rich men if we had 1000 pounds
for every poor devil who has been done to death in that den. It
is the vilest murder-trap on the whole riverside, and I fear that
Neville St. Clair has entered it never to leave it more. But our
trap should be here." He put his two forefingers between his
teeth and whistled shrilly--a signal which was answered by a
similar whistle from the distance, followed shortly by the rattle
of wheels and the clink of horses' hoofs.

"Now, Watson," said Holmes, as a tall dog-cart dashed up through
the gloom, throwing out two golden tunnels of yellow light from
its side lanterns. "You'll come with me, won't you?"

"If I can be of use."

"Oh, a trusty comrade is always of use; and a chronicler still
more so. My room at The Cedars is a double-bedded one."

"The Cedars?"

"Yes; that is Mr. St. Clair's house. I am staying there while I
conduct the inquiry."

"Where is it, then?"

"Near Lee, in Kent. We have a seven-mile drive before us."

"But I am all in the dark."

"Of course you are. You'll know all about it presently. Jump up
here. All right, John; we shall not need you. Here's half a
crown. Look out for me to-morrow, about eleven. Give her her
head. So long, then!"

He flicked the horse with his whip, and we dashed away through
the endless succession of sombre and deserted streets, which
widened gradually, until we were flying across a broad
balustraded bridge, with the murky river flowing sluggishly
beneath us. Beyond lay another dull wilderness of bricks and
mortar, its silence broken only by the heavy, regular footfall of
the policeman, or the songs and shouts of some belated party of
revellers. A dull wrack was drifting slowly across the sky, and a
star or two twinkled dimly here and there through the rifts of
the clouds. Holmes drove in silence, with his head sunk upon his
breast, and the air of a man who is lost in thought, while I sat
beside him, curious to learn what this new quest might be which
seemed to tax his powers so sorely, and yet afraid to break in
upon the current of his thoughts. We had driven several miles,
and were beginning to get to the fringe of the belt of suburban
villas, when he shook himself, shrugged his shoulders, and lit up
his pipe with the air of a man who has satisfied himself that he
is acting for the best.

"You have a grand gift of silence, Watson," said he. "It makes
you quite invaluable as a companion. 'Pon my word, it is a great
thing for me to have someone to talk to, for my own thoughts are
not over-pleasant. I was wondering what I should say to this dear
little woman to-night when she meets me at the door."

"You forget that I know nothing about it."

"I shall just have time to tell you the facts of the case before
we get to Lee. It seems absurdly simple, and yet, somehow I can
get nothing to go upon. There's plenty of thread, no doubt, but I
can't get the end of it into my hand. Now, I'll state the case
clearly and concisely to you, Watson, and maybe you can see a
spark where all is dark to me."

"Proceed, then."

"Some years ago--to be definite, in May, 1884--there came to Lee
a gentleman, Neville St. Clair by name, who appeared to have
plenty of money. He took a large villa, laid out the grounds very
nicely, and lived generally in good style. By degrees he made
friends in the neighbourhood, and in 1887 he married the daughter
of a local brewer, by whom he now has two children. He had no
occupation, but was interested in several companies and went into
town as a rule in the morning, returning by the 5:14 from Cannon
Street every night. Mr. St. Clair is now thirty-seven years of
age, is a man of temperate habits, a good husband, a very
affectionate father, and a man who is popular with all who know
him. I may add that his whole debts at the present moment, as far
as we have been able to ascertain, amount to 88 pounds 10s., while
he has 220 pounds standing to his credit in the Capital and
Counties Bank. There is no reason, therefore, to think that money
troubles have been weighing upon his mind.

"Last Monday Mr. Neville St. Clair went into town rather earlier
than usual, remarking before he started that he had two important
commissions to perform, and that he would bring his little boy
home a box of bricks. Now, by the merest chance, his wife
received a telegram upon this same Monday, very shortly after his
departure, to the effect that a small parcel of considerable
value which she had been expecting was waiting for her at the
offices of the Aberdeen Shipping Company. Now, if you are well up
in your London, you will know that the office of the company is
in Fresno Street, which branches out of Upper Swandam Lane, where
you found me to-night. Mrs. St. Clair had her lunch, started for
the City, did some shopping, proceeded to the company's office,
got her packet, and found herself at exactly 4:35 walking through
Swandam Lane on her way back to the station. Have you followed me
so far?"

"It is very clear."

"If you remember, Monday was an exceedingly hot day, and Mrs. St.
Clair walked slowly, glancing about in the hope of seeing a cab,
as she did not like the neighbourhood in which she found herself.
While she was walking in this way down Swandam Lane, she suddenly
heard an ejaculation or cry, and was struck cold to see her
husband looking down at her and, as it seemed to her, beckoning
to her from a second-floor window. The window was open, and she
distinctly saw his face, which she describes as being terribly
agitated. He waved his hands frantically to her, and then
vanished from the window so suddenly that it seemed to her that
he had been plucked back by some irresistible force from behind.
One singular point which struck her quick feminine eye was that
although he wore some dark coat, such as he had started to town
in, he had on neither collar nor necktie.

"Convinced that something was amiss with him, she rushed down the
steps--for the house was none other than the opium den in which
you found me to-night--and running through the front room she
attempted to ascend the stairs which led to the first floor. At
the foot of the stairs, however, she met this Lascar scoundrel of
whom I have spoken, who thrust her back and, aided by a Dane, who
acts as assistant there, pushed her out into the street. Filled
with the most maddening doubts and fears, she rushed down the
lane and, by rare good-fortune, met in Fresno Street a number of
constables with an inspector, all on their way to their beat. The
inspector and two men accompanied her back, and in spite of the
continued resistance of the proprietor, they made their way to
the room in which Mr. St. Clair had last been seen. There was no
sign of him there. In fact, in the whole of that floor there was
no one to be found save a crippled wretch of hideous aspect, who,
it seems, made his home there. Both he and the Lascar stoutly
swore that no one else had been in the front room during the
afternoon. So determined was their denial that the inspector was
staggered, and had almost come to believe that Mrs. St. Clair had
been deluded when, with a cry, she sprang at a small deal box
which lay upon the table and tore the lid from it. Out there fell
a cascade of children's bricks. It was the toy which he had
promised to bring home.

"This discovery, and the evident confusion which the cripple
showed, made the inspector realise that the matter was serious.
The rooms were carefully examined, and results all pointed to an
abominable crime. The front room was plainly furnished as a
sitting-room and led into a small bedroom, which looked out upon
the back of one of the wharves. Between the wharf and the bedroom
window is a narrow strip, which is dry at low tide but is covered
at high tide with at least four and a half feet of water. The
bedroom window was a broad one and opened from below. On
examination traces of blood were to be seen upon the windowsill,
and several scattered drops were visible upon the wooden floor of
the bedroom. Thrust away behind a curtain in the front room were
all the clothes of Mr. Neville St. Clair, with the exception of
his coat. His boots, his socks, his hat, and his watch--all were
there. There were no signs of violence upon any of these
garments, and there were no other traces of Mr. Neville St.
Clair. Out of the window he must apparently have gone for no
other exit could be discovered, and the ominous bloodstains upon
the sill gave little promise that he could save himself by
swimming, for the tide was at its very highest at the moment of
the tragedy.

"And now as to the villains who seemed to be immediately
implicated in the matter. The Lascar was known to be a man of the
vilest antecedents, but as, by Mrs. St. Clair's story, he was
known to have been at the foot of the stair within a very few
seconds of her husband's appearance at the window, he could
hardly have been more than an accessory to the crime. His defence
was one of absolute ignorance, and he protested that he had no
knowledge as to the doings of Hugh Boone, his lodger, and that he
could not account in any way for the presence of the missing
gentleman's clothes.

"So much for the Lascar manager. Now for the sinister cripple who
lives upon the second floor of the opium den, and who was
certainly the last human being whose eyes rested upon Neville St.
Clair. His name is Hugh Boone, and his hideous face is one which
is familiar to every man who goes much to the City. He is a
professional beggar, though in order to avoid the police
regulations he pretends to a small trade in wax vestas. Some
little distance down Threadneedle Street, upon the left-hand
side, there is, as you may have remarked, a small angle in the
wall. Here it is that this creature takes his daily seat,
cross-legged with his tiny stock of matches on his lap, and as he
is a piteous spectacle a small rain of charity descends into the
greasy leather cap which lies upon the pavement beside him. I
have watched the fellow more than once before ever I thought of
making his professional acquaintance, and I have been surprised
at the harvest which he has reaped in a short time. His
appearance, you see, is so remarkable that no one can pass him
without observing him. A shock of orange hair, a pale face
disfigured by a horrible scar, which, by its contraction, has
turned up the outer edge of his upper lip, a bulldog chin, and a
pair of very penetrating dark eyes, which present a singular
contrast to the colour of his hair, all mark him out from amid
the common crowd of mendicants and so, too, does his wit, for he
is ever ready with a reply to any piece of chaff which may be
thrown at him by the passers-by. This is the man whom we now
learn to have been the lodger at the opium den, and to have been
the last man to see the gentleman of whom we are in quest."

"But a cripple!" said I. "What could he have done single-handed
against a man in the prime of life?"

"He is a cripple in the sense that he walks with a limp; but in
other respects he appears to be a powerful and well-nurtured man.
Surely your medical experience would tell you, Watson, that
weakness in one limb is often compensated for by exceptional
strength in the others."

"Pray continue your narrative."

"Mrs. St. Clair had fainted at the sight of the blood upon the
window, and she was escorted home in a cab by the police, as her
presence could be of no help to them in their investigations.
Inspector Barton, who had charge of the case, made a very careful
examination of the premises, but without finding anything which
threw any light upon the matter. One mistake had been made in not
arresting Boone instantly, as he was allowed some few minutes
during which he might have communicated with his friend the
Lascar, but this fault was soon remedied, and he was seized and
searched, without anything being found which could incriminate
him. There were, it is true, some blood-stains upon his right
shirt-sleeve, but he pointed to his ring-finger, which had been
cut near the nail, and explained that the bleeding came from
there, adding that he had been to the window not long before, and
that the stains which had been observed there came doubtless from
the same source. He denied strenuously having ever seen Mr.
Neville St. Clair and swore that the presence of the clothes in
his room was as much a mystery to him as to the police. As to
Mrs. St. Clair's assertion that she had actually seen her husband
at the window, he declared that she must have been either mad or
dreaming. He was removed, loudly protesting, to the
police-station, while the inspector remained upon the premises in
the hope that the ebbing tide might afford some fresh clue.

"And it did, though they hardly found upon the mud-bank what they
had feared to find. It was Neville St. Clair's coat, and not
Neville St. Clair, which lay uncovered as the tide receded. And
what do you think they found in the pockets?"

"I cannot imagine."

"No, I don't think you would guess. Every pocket stuffed with
pennies and half-pennies--421 pennies and 270 half-pennies. It
was no wonder that it had not been swept away by the tide. But a
human body is a different matter. There is a fierce eddy between
the wharf and the house. It seemed likely enough that the
weighted coat had remained when the stripped body had been sucked
away into the river."

"But I understand that all the other clothes were found in the
room. Would the body be dressed in a coat alone?"

"No, sir, but the facts might be met speciously enough. Suppose
that this man Boone had thrust Neville St. Clair through the
window, there is no human eye which could have seen the deed.
What would he do then? It would of course instantly strike him
that he must get rid of the tell-tale garments. He would seize
the coat, then, and be in the act of throwing it out, when it
would occur to him that it would swim and not sink. He has little
time, for he has heard the scuffle downstairs when the wife tried
to force her way up, and perhaps he has already heard from his
Lascar confederate that the police are hurrying up the street.
There is not an instant to be lost. He rushes to some secret
hoard, where he has accumulated the fruits of his beggary, and he
stuffs all the coins upon which he can lay his hands into the
pockets to make sure of the coat's sinking. He throws it out, and
would have done the same with the other garments had not he heard
the rush of steps below, and only just had time to close the
window when the police appeared."

"It certainly sounds feasible."

"Well, we will take it as a working hypothesis for want of a
better. Boone, as I have told you, was arrested and taken to the
station, but it could not be shown that there had ever before
been anything against him. He had for years been known as a
professional beggar, but his life appeared to have been a very
quiet and innocent one. There the matter stands at present, and
the questions which have to be solved--what Neville St. Clair was
doing in the opium den, what happened to him when there, where is
he now, and what Hugh Boone had to do with his disappearance--are
all as far from a solution as ever. I confess that I cannot
recall any case within my experience which looked at the first
glance so simple and yet which presented such difficulties."

While Sherlock Holmes had been detailing this singular series of
events, we had been whirling through the outskirts of the great
town until the last straggling houses had been left behind, and
we rattled along with a country hedge upon either side of us.
Just as he finished, however, we drove through two scattered
villages, where a few lights still glimmered in the windows.

"We are on the outskirts of Lee," said my companion. "We have
touched on three English counties in our short drive, starting in
Middlesex, passing over an angle of Surrey, and ending in Kent.
See that light among the trees? That is The Cedars, and beside
that lamp sits a woman whose anxious ears have already, I have
little doubt, caught the clink of our horse's feet."

"But why are you not conducting the case from Baker Street?" I
asked.

"Because there are many inquiries which must be made out here.
Mrs. St. Clair has most kindly put two rooms at my disposal, and
you may rest assured that she will have nothing but a welcome for
my friend and colleague. I hate to meet her, Watson, when I have
no news of her husband. Here we are. Whoa, there, whoa!"

We had pulled up in front of a large villa which stood within its
own grounds. A stable-boy had run out to the horse's head, and
springing down, I followed Holmes up the small, winding
gravel-drive which led to the house. As we approached, the door
flew open, and a little blonde woman stood in the opening, clad
in some sort of light mousseline de soie, with a touch of fluffy
pink chiffon at her neck and wrists. She stood with her figure
outlined against the flood of light, one hand upon the door, one
half-raised in her eagerness, her body slightly bent, her head
and face protruded, with eager eyes and parted lips, a standing
question.

"Well?" she cried, "well?" And then, seeing that there were two
of us, she gave a cry of hope which sank into a groan as she saw
that my companion shook his head and shrugged his shoulders.

"No good news?"

"None."

"No bad?"

"No."

"Thank God for that. But come in. You must be weary, for you have
had a long day."

"This is my friend, Dr. Watson. He has been of most vital use to
me in several of my cases, and a lucky chance has made it
possible for me to bring him out and associate him with this
investigation."

"I am delighted to see you," said she, pressing my hand warmly.
"You will, I am sure, forgive anything that may be wanting in our
arrangements, when you consider the blow which has come so
suddenly upon us."

"My dear madam," said I, "I am an old campaigner, and if I were
not I can very well see that no apology is needed. If I can be of
any assistance, either to you or to my friend here, I shall be
indeed happy."

"Now, Mr. Sherlock Holmes," said the lady as we entered a
well-lit dining-room, upon the table of which a cold supper had
been laid out, "I should very much like to ask you one or two
plain questions, to which I beg that you will give a plain
answer."

"Certainly, madam."

"Do not trouble about my feelings. I am not hysterical, nor given
to fainting. I simply wish to hear your real, real opinion."

"Upon what point?"

"In your heart of hearts, do you think that Neville is alive?"

Sherlock Holmes seemed to be embarrassed by the question.
"Frankly, now!" she repeated, standing upon the rug and looking
keenly down at him as he leaned back in a basket-chair.

"Frankly, then, madam, I do not."

"You think that he is dead?"

"I do."

"Murdered?"

"I don't say that. Perhaps."

"And on what day did he meet his death?"

"On Monday."

"Then perhaps, Mr. Holmes, you will be good enough to explain how
it is that I have received a letter from him to-day."

Sherlock Holmes sprang out of his chair as if he had been
galvanised.

"What!" he roared.

"Yes, to-day." She stood smiling, holding up a little slip of
paper in the air.

"May I see it?"

"Certainly."

He snatched it from her in his eagerness, and smoothing it out
upon the table he drew over the lamp and examined it intently. I
had left my chair and was gazing at it over his shoulder. The
envelope was a very coarse one and was stamped with the Gravesend
postmark and with the date of that very day, or rather of the day
before, for it was considerably after midnight.

"Coarse writing," murmured Holmes. "Surely this is not your
husband's writing, madam."

"No, but the enclosure is."

"I perceive also that whoever addressed the envelope had to go
and inquire as to the address."

"How can you tell that?"

"The name, you see, is in perfectly black ink, which has dried
itself. The rest is of the greyish colour, which shows that
blotting-paper has been used. If it had been written straight
off, and then blotted, none would be of a deep black shade. This
man has written the name, and there has then been a pause before
he wrote the address, which can only mean that he was not
familiar with it. It is, of course, a trifle, but there is
nothing so important as trifles. Let us now see the letter. Ha!
there has been an enclosure here!"

"Yes, there was a ring. His signet-ring."

"And you are sure that this is your husband's hand?"

"One of his hands."

"One?"

"His hand when he wrote hurriedly. It is very unlike his usual
writing, and yet I know it well."

"'Dearest do not be frightened. All will come well. There is a
huge error which it may take some little time to rectify.
Wait in patience.--NEVILLE.' Written in pencil upon the fly-leaf
of a book, octavo size, no water-mark. Hum! Posted to-day in
Gravesend by a man with a dirty thumb. Ha! And the flap has been
gummed, if I am not very much in error, by a person who had been
chewing tobacco. And you have no doubt that it is your husband's
hand, madam?"

"None. Neville wrote those words."

"And they were posted to-day at Gravesend. Well, Mrs. St. Clair,
the clouds lighten, though I should not venture to say that the
danger is over."

"But he must be alive, Mr. Holmes."

"Unless this is a clever forgery to put us on the wrong scent.
The ring, after all, proves nothing. It may have been taken from
him."

"No, no; it is, it is his very own writing!"

"Very well. It may, however, have been written on Monday and only
posted to-day."

"That is possible."

"If so, much may have happened between."

"Oh, you must not discourage me, Mr. Holmes. I know that all is
well with him. There is so keen a sympathy between us that I
should know if evil came upon him. On the very day that I saw him
last he cut himself in the bedroom, and yet I in the dining-room
rushed upstairs instantly with the utmost certainty that
something had happened. Do you think that I would respond to such
a trifle and yet be ignorant of his death?"

"I have seen too much not to know that the impression of a woman
may be more valuable than the conclusion of an analytical
reasoner. And in this letter you certainly have a very strong
piece of evidence to corroborate your view. But if your husband
is alive and able to write letters, why should he remain away
from you?"

"I cannot imagine. It is unthinkable."

"And on Monday he made no remarks before leaving you?"

"No."

"And you were surprised to see him in Swandam Lane?"

"Very much so."

"Was the window open?"

"Yes."

"Then he might have called to you?"

"He might."

"He only, as I understand, gave an inarticulate cry?"

"Yes."

"A call for help, you thought?"

"Yes. He waved his hands."

"But it might have been a cry of surprise. Astonishment at the
unexpected sight of you might cause him to throw up his hands?"

"It is possible."

"And you thought he was pulled back?"

"He disappeared so suddenly."

"He might have leaped back. You did not see anyone else in the
room?"

"No, but this horrible man confessed to having been there, and
the Lascar was at the foot of the stairs."

"Quite so. Your husband, as far as you could see, had his
ordinary clothes on?"

"But without his collar or tie. I distinctly saw his bare
throat."

"Had he ever spoken of Swandam Lane?"

"Never."

"Had he ever showed any signs of having taken opium?"

"Never."

"Thank you, Mrs. St. Clair. Those are the principal points about
which I wished to be absolutely clear. We shall now have a little
supper and then retire, for we may have a very busy day
to-morrow."

A large and comfortable double-bedded room had been placed at our
disposal, and I was quickly between the sheets, for I was weary
after my night of adventure. Sherlock Holmes was a man, however,
who, when he had an unsolved problem upon his mind, would go for
days, and even for a week, without rest, turning it over,
rearranging his facts, looking at it from every point of view
until he had either fathomed it or convinced himself that his
data were insufficient. It was soon evident to me that he was now
preparing for an all-night sitting. He took off his coat and
waistcoat, put on a large blue dressing-gown, and then wandered
about the room collecting pillows from his bed and cushions from
the sofa and armchairs. With these he constructed a sort of
Eastern divan, upon which he perched himself cross-legged, with
an ounce of shag tobacco and a box of matches laid out in front
of him. In the dim light of the lamp I saw him sitting there, an
old briar pipe between his lips, his eyes fixed vacantly upon the
corner of the ceiling, the blue smoke curling up from him,
silent, motionless, with the light shining upon his strong-set
aquiline features. So he sat as I dropped off to sleep, and so he
sat when a sudden ejaculation caused me to wake up, and I found
the summer sun shining into the apartment. The pipe was still
between his lips, the smoke still curled upward, and the room was
full of a dense tobacco haze, but nothing remained of the heap of
shag which I had seen upon the previous night.

"Awake, Watson?" he asked.

"Yes."

"Game for a morning drive?"

"Certainly."

"Then dress. No one is stirring yet, but I know where the
stable-boy sleeps, and we shall soon have the trap out." He
chuckled to himself as he spoke, his eyes twinkled, and he seemed
a different man to the sombre thinker of the previous night.

As I dressed I glanced at my watch. It was no wonder that no one
was stirring. It was twenty-five minutes past four. I had hardly
finished when Holmes returned with the news that the boy was
putting in the horse.

"I want to test a little theory of mine," said he, pulling on his
boots. "I think, Watson, that you are now standing in the
presence of one of the most absolute fools in Europe. I deserve
to be kicked from here to Charing Cross. But I think I have the
key of the affair now."

"And where is it?" I asked, smiling.

"In the bathroom," he answered. "Oh, yes, I am not joking," he
continued, seeing my look of incredulity. "I have just been
there, and I have taken it out, and I have got it in this
Gladstone bag. Come on, my boy, and we shall see whether it will
not fit the lock."

We made our way downstairs as quietly as possible, and out into
the bright morning sunshine. In the road stood our horse and
trap, with the half-clad stable-boy waiting at the head. We both
sprang in, and away we dashed down the London Road. A few country
carts were stirring, bearing in vegetables to the metropolis, but
the lines of villas on either side were as silent and lifeless as
some city in a dream.

"It has been in some points a singular case," said Holmes,
flicking the horse on into a gallop. "I confess that I have been
as blind as a mole, but it is better to learn wisdom late than
never to learn it at all."

In town the earliest risers were just beginning to look sleepily
from their windows as we drove through the streets of the Surrey
side. Passing down the Waterloo Bridge Road we crossed over the
river, and dashing up Wellington Street wheeled sharply to the
right and found ourselves in Bow Street. Sherlock Holmes was well
known to the force, and the two constables at the door saluted
him. One of them held the horse's head while the other led us in.

"Who is on duty?" asked Holmes.

"Inspector Bradstreet, sir."

"Ah, Bradstreet, how are you?" A tall, stout official had come
down the stone-flagged passage, in a peaked cap and frogged
jacket. "I wish to have a quiet word with you, Bradstreet."
"Certainly, Mr. Holmes. Step into my room here." It was a small,
office-like room, with a huge ledger upon the table, and a
telephone projecting from the wall. The inspector sat down at his
desk.

"What can I do for you, Mr. Holmes?"

"I called about that beggarman, Boone--the one who was charged
with being concerned in the disappearance of Mr. Neville St.
Clair, of Lee."

"Yes. He was brought up and remanded for further inquiries."

"So I heard. You have him here?"

"In the cells."

"Is he quiet?"

"Oh, he gives no trouble. But he is a dirty scoundrel."

"Dirty?"

"Yes, it is all we can do to make him wash his hands, and his
face is as black as a tinker's. Well, when once his case has been
settled, he will have a regular prison bath; and I think, if you
saw him, you would agree with me that he needed it."

"I should like to see him very much."

"Would you? That is easily done. Come this way. You can leave
your bag."

"No, I think that I'll take it."

"Very good. Come this way, if you please." He led us down a
passage, opened a barred door, passed down a winding stair, and
brought us to a whitewashed corridor with a line of doors on each
side.

"The third on the right is his," said the inspector. "Here it
is!" He quietly shot back a panel in the upper part of the door
and glanced through.

"He is asleep," said he. "You can see him very well."

We both put our eyes to the grating. The prisoner lay with his
face towards us, in a very deep sleep, breathing slowly and
heavily. He was a middle-sized man, coarsely clad as became his
calling, with a coloured shirt protruding through the rent in his
tattered coat. He was, as the inspector had said, extremely
dirty, but the grime which covered his face could not conceal its
repulsive ugliness. A broad wheal from an old scar ran right
across it from eye to chin, and by its contraction had turned up
one side of the upper lip, so that three teeth were exposed in a
perpetual snarl. A shock of very bright red hair grew low over
his eyes and forehead.

"He's a beauty, isn't he?" said the inspector.

"He certainly needs a wash," remarked Holmes. "I had an idea that
he might, and I took the liberty of bringing the tools with me."
He opened the Gladstone bag as he spoke, and took out, to my
astonishment, a very large bath-sponge.

"He! he! You are a funny one," chuckled the inspector.

"Now, if you will have the great goodness to open that door very
quietly, we will soon make him cut a much more respectable
figure."

"Well, I don't know why not," said the inspector. "He doesn't
look a credit to the Bow Street cells, does he?" He slipped his
key into the lock, and we all very quietly entered the cell. The
sleeper half turned, and then settled down once more into a deep
slumber. Holmes stooped to the water-jug, moistened his sponge,
and then rubbed it twice vigorously across and down the
prisoner's face.

"Let me introduce you," he shouted, "to Mr. Neville St. Clair, of
Lee, in the county of Kent."

Never in my life have I seen such a sight. The man's face peeled
off under the sponge like the bark from a tree. Gone was the
coarse brown tint! Gone, too, was the horrid scar which had
seamed it across, and the twisted lip which had given the
repulsive sneer to the face! A twitch brought away the tangled
red hair, and there, sitting up in his bed, was a pale,
sad-faced, refined-looking man, black-haired and smooth-skinned,
rubbing his eyes and staring about him with sleepy bewilderment.
Then suddenly realising the exposure, he broke into a scream and
threw himself down with his face to the pillow.

"Great heavens!" cried the inspector, "it is, indeed, the missing
man. I know him from the photograph."

The prisoner turned with the reckless air of a man who abandons
himself to his destiny. "Be it so," said he. "And pray what am I
charged with?"

"With making away with Mr. Neville St.-- Oh, come, you can't be
charged with that unless they make a case of attempted suicide of
it," said the inspector with a grin. "Well, I have been
twenty-seven years in the force, but this really takes the cake."

"If I am Mr. Neville St. Clair, then it is obvious that no crime
has been committed, and that, therefore, I am illegally
detained."

"No crime, but a very great error has been committed," said
Holmes. "You would have done better to have trusted your wife."

"It was not the wife; it was the children," groaned the prisoner.
"God help me, I would not have them ashamed of their father. My
God! What an exposure! What can I do?"

Sherlock Holmes sat down beside him on the couch and patted him
kindly on the shoulder.

"If you leave it to a court of law to clear the matter up," said
he, "of course you can hardly avoid publicity. On the other hand,
if you convince the police authorities that there is no possible
case against you, I do not know that there is any reason that the
details should find their way into the papers. Inspector
Bradstreet would, I am sure, make notes upon anything which you
might tell us and submit it to the proper authorities. The case
would then never go into court at all."

"God bless you!" cried the prisoner passionately. "I would have
endured imprisonment, ay, even execution, rather than have left
my miserable secret as a family blot to my children.

"You are the first who have ever heard my story. My father was a
schoolmaster in Chesterfield, where I received an excellent
education. I travelled in my youth, took to the stage, and
finally became a reporter on an evening paper in London. One day
my editor wished to have a series of articles upon begging in the
metropolis, and I volunteered to supply them. There was the point
from which all my adventures started. It was only by trying
begging as an amateur that I could get the facts upon which to
base my articles. When an actor I had, of course, learned all the
secrets of making up, and had been famous in the green-room for
my skill. I took advantage now of my attainments. I painted my
face, and to make myself as pitiable as possible I made a good
scar and fixed one side of my lip in a twist by the aid of a
small slip of flesh-coloured plaster. Then with a red head of
hair, and an appropriate dress, I took my station in the business
part of the city, ostensibly as a match-seller but really as a
beggar. For seven hours I plied my trade, and when I returned
home in the evening I found to my surprise that I had received no
less than 26s. 4d.

"I wrote my articles and thought little more of the matter until,
some time later, I backed a bill for a friend and had a writ
served upon me for 25 pounds. I was at my wit's end where to get
the money, but a sudden idea came to me. I begged a fortnight's
grace from the creditor, asked for a holiday from my employers,
and spent the time in begging in the City under my disguise. In
ten days I had the money and had paid the debt.

"Well, you can imagine how hard it was to settle down to arduous
work at 2 pounds a week when I knew that I could earn as much in
a day by smearing my face with a little paint, laying my cap on
the ground, and sitting still. It was a long fight between my
pride and the money, but the dollars won at last, and I threw up
reporting and sat day after day in the corner which I had first
chosen, inspiring pity by my ghastly face and filling my pockets
with coppers. Only one man knew my secret. He was the keeper of a
low den in which I used to lodge in Swandam Lane, where I could
every morning emerge as a squalid beggar and in the evenings
transform myself into a well-dressed man about town. This fellow,
a Lascar, was well paid by me for his rooms, so that I knew that
my secret was safe in his possession.

"Well, very soon I found that I was saving considerable sums of
money. I do not mean that any beggar in the streets of London
could earn 700 pounds a year--which is less than my average
takings--but I had exceptional advantages in my power of making
up, and also in a facility of repartee, which improved by
practice and made me quite a recognised character in the City.
All day a stream of pennies, varied by silver, poured in upon me,
and it was a very bad day in which I failed to take 2 pounds.

"As I grew richer I grew more ambitious, took a house in the
country, and eventually married, without anyone having a
suspicion as to my real occupation. My dear wife knew that I had
business in the City. She little knew what.

"Last Monday I had finished for the day and was dressing in my
room above the opium den when I looked out of my window and saw,
to my horror and astonishment, that my wife was standing in the
street, with her eyes fixed full upon me. I gave a cry of
surprise, threw up my arms to cover my face, and, rushing to my
confidant, the Lascar, entreated him to prevent anyone from
coming up to me. I heard her voice downstairs, but I knew that
she could not ascend. Swiftly I threw off my clothes, pulled on
those of a beggar, and put on my pigments and wig. Even a wife's
eyes could not pierce so complete a disguise. But then it
occurred to me that there might be a search in the room, and that
the clothes might betray me. I threw open the window, reopening
by my violence a small cut which I had inflicted upon myself in
the bedroom that morning. Then I seized my coat, which was
weighted by the coppers which I had just transferred to it from
the leather bag in which I carried my takings. I hurled it out of
the window, and it disappeared into the Thames. The other clothes
would have followed, but at that moment there was a rush of
constables up the stair, and a few minutes after I found, rather,
I confess, to my relief, that instead of being identified as Mr.
Neville St. Clair, I was arrested as his murderer.

"I do not know that there is anything else for me to explain. I
was determined to preserve my disguise as long as possible, and
hence my preference for a dirty face. Knowing that my wife would
be terribly anxious, I slipped off my ring and confided it to the
Lascar at a moment when no constable was watching me, together
with a hurried scrawl, telling her that she had no cause to
fear."

"That note only reached her yesterday," said Holmes.

"Good God! What a week she must have spent!"

"The police have watched this Lascar," said Inspector Bradstreet,
"and I can quite understand that he might find it difficult to
post a letter unobserved. Probably he handed it to some sailor
customer of his, who forgot all about it for some days."

"That was it," said Holmes, nodding approvingly; "I have no doubt
of it. But have you never been prosecuted for begging?"

"Many times; but what was a fine to me?"

"It must stop here, however," said Bradstreet. "If the police are
to hush this thing up, there must be no more of Hugh Boone."

"I have sworn it by the most solemn oaths which a man can take."

"In that case I think that it is probable that no further steps
may be taken. But if you are found again, then all must come out.
I am sure, Mr. Holmes, that we are very much indebted to you for
having cleared the matter up. I wish I knew how you reach your
results."

"I reached this one," said my friend, "by sitting upon five
pillows and consuming an ounce of shag. I think, Watson, that if
we drive to Baker Street we shall just be in time for breakfast."



VII. THE ADVENTURE OF THE BLUE CARBUNCLE

I had called upon my friend Sherlock Holmes upon the second
morning after Christmas, with the intention of wishing him the
compliments of the season. He was lounging upon the sofa in a
purple dressing-gown, a pipe-rack within his reach upon the
right, and a pile of crumpled morning papers, evidently newly
studied, near at hand. Beside the couch was a wooden chair, and
on the angle of the back hung a very seedy and disreputable
hard-felt hat, much the worse for wear, and cracked in several
places. A lens and a forceps lying upon the seat of the chair
suggested that the hat had been suspended in this manner for the
purpose of examination.

"You are engaged," said I; "perhaps I interrupt you."

"Not at all. I am glad to have a friend with whom I can discuss
my results. The matter is a perfectly trivial one"--he jerked his
thumb in the direction of the old hat--"but there are points in
connection with it which are not entirely devoid of interest and
even of instruction."

I seated myself in his armchair and warmed my hands before his
crackling fire, for a sharp frost had set in, and the windows
were thick with the ice crystals. "I suppose," I remarked, "that,
homely as it looks, this thing has some deadly story linked on to
it--that it is the clue which will guide you in the solution of
some mystery and the punishment of some crime."

"No, no. No crime," said Sherlock Holmes, laughing. "Only one of
those whimsical little incidents which will happen when you have
four million human beings all jostling each other within the
space of a few square miles. Amid the action and reaction of so
dense a swarm of humanity, every possible combination of events
may be expected to take place, and many a little problem will be
presented which may be striking and bizarre without being
criminal. We have already had experience of such."

"So much so," I remarked, "that of the last six cases which I
have added to my notes, three have been entirely free of any
legal crime."

"Precisely. You allude to my attempt to recover the Irene Adler
papers, to the singular case of Miss Mary Sutherland, and to the
adventure of the man with the twisted lip. Well, I have no doubt
that this small matter will fall into the same innocent category.
You know Peterson, the commissionaire?"

"Yes."

"It is to him that this trophy belongs."

"It is his hat."

"No, no, he found it. Its owner is unknown. I beg that you will
look upon it not as a battered billycock but as an intellectual
problem. And, first, as to how it came here. It arrived upon
Christmas morning, in company with a good fat goose, which is, I
have no doubt, roasting at this moment in front of Peterson's
fire. The facts are these: about four o'clock on Christmas
morning, Peterson, who, as you know, is a very honest fellow, was
returning from some small jollification and was making his way
homeward down Tottenham Court Road. In front of him he saw, in
the gaslight, a tallish man, walking with a slight stagger, and
carrying a white goose slung over his shoulder. As he reached the
corner of Goodge Street, a row broke out between this stranger
and a little knot of roughs. One of the latter knocked off the
man's hat, on which he raised his stick to defend himself and,
swinging it over his head, smashed the shop window behind him.
Peterson had rushed forward to protect the stranger from his
assailants; but the man, shocked at having broken the window, and
seeing an official-looking person in uniform rushing towards him,
dropped his goose, took to his heels, and vanished amid the
labyrinth of small streets which lie at the back of Tottenham
Court Road. The roughs had also fled at the appearance of
Peterson, so that he was left in possession of the field of
battle, and also of the spoils of victory in the shape of this
battered hat and a most unimpeachable Christmas goose."

"Which surely he restored to their owner?"

"My dear fellow, there lies the problem. It is true that 'For
Mrs. Henry Baker' was printed upon a small card which was tied to
the bird's left leg, and it is also true that the initials 'H.
B.' are legible upon the lining of this hat, but as there are
some thousands of Bakers, and some hundreds of Henry Bakers in
this city of ours, it is not easy to restore lost property to any
one of them."

"What, then, did Peterson do?"

"He brought round both hat and goose to me on Christmas morning,
knowing that even the smallest problems are of interest to me.
The goose we retained until this morning, when there were signs
that, in spite of the slight frost, it would be well that it
should be eaten without unnecessary delay. Its finder has carried
it off, therefore, to fulfil the ultimate destiny of a goose,
while I continue to retain the hat of the unknown gentleman who
lost his Christmas dinner."

"Did he not advertise?"

"No."

"Then, what clue could you have as to his identity?"

"Only as much as we can deduce."

"From his hat?"

"Precisely."

"But you are joking. What can you gather from this old battered
felt?"

"Here is my lens. You know my methods. What can you gather
yourself as to the individuality of the man who has worn this
article?"

I took the tattered object in my hands and turned it over rather
ruefully. It was a very ordinary black hat of the usual round
shape, hard and much the worse for wear. The lining had been of
red silk, but was a good deal discoloured. There was no maker's
name; but, as Holmes had remarked, the initials "H. B." were
scrawled upon one side. It was pierced in the brim for a
hat-securer, but the elastic was missing. For the rest, it was
cracked, exceedingly dusty, and spotted in several places,
although there seemed to have been some attempt to hide the
discoloured patches by smearing them with ink.

"I can see nothing," said I, handing it back to my friend.

"On the contrary, Watson, you can see everything. You fail,
however, to reason from what you see. You are too timid in
drawing your inferences."

"Then, pray tell me what it is that you can infer from this hat?"

He picked it up and gazed at it in the peculiar introspective
fashion which was characteristic of him. "It is perhaps less
suggestive than it might have been," he remarked, "and yet there
are a few inferences which are very distinct, and a few others
which represent at least a strong balance of probability. That
the man was highly intellectual is of course obvious upon the
face of it, and also that he was fairly well-to-do within the
last three years, although he has now fallen upon evil days. He
had foresight, but has less now than formerly, pointing to a
moral retrogression, which, when taken with the decline of his
fortunes, seems to indicate some evil influence, probably drink,
at work upon him. This may account also for the obvious fact that
his wife has ceased to love him."

"My dear Holmes!"

"He has, however, retained some degree of self-respect," he
continued, disregarding my remonstrance. "He is a man who leads a
sedentary life, goes out little, is out of training entirely, is
middle-aged, has grizzled hair which he has had cut within the
last few days, and which he anoints with lime-cream. These are
the more patent facts which are to be deduced from his hat. Also,
by the way, that it is extremely improbable that he has gas laid
on in his house."

"You are certainly joking, Holmes."

"Not in the least. Is it possible that even now, when I give you
these results, you are unable to see how they are attained?"

"I have no doubt that I am very stupid, but I must confess that I
am unable to follow you. For example, how did you deduce that
this man was intellectual?"

For answer Holmes clapped the hat upon his head. It came right
over the forehead and settled upon the bridge of his nose. "It is
a question of cubic capacity," said he; "a man with so large a
brain must have something in it."

"The decline of his fortunes, then?"

"This hat is three years old. These flat brims curled at the edge
came in then. It is a hat of the very best quality. Look at the
band of ribbed silk and the excellent lining. If this man could
afford to buy so expensive a hat three years ago, and has had no
hat since, then he has assuredly gone down in the world."

"Well, that is clear enough, certainly. But how about the
foresight and the moral retrogression?"

Sherlock Holmes laughed. "Here is the foresight," said he putting
his finger upon the little disc and loop of the hat-securer.
"They are never sold upon hats. If this man ordered one, it is a
sign of a certain amount of foresight, since he went out of his
way to take this precaution against the wind. But since we see
that he has broken the elastic and has not troubled to replace
it, it is obvious that he has less foresight now than formerly,
which is a distinct proof of a weakening nature. On the other
hand, he has endeavoured to conceal some of these stains upon the
felt by daubing them with ink, which is a sign that he has not
entirely lost his self-respect."

"Your reasoning is certainly plausible."

"The further points, that he is middle-aged, that his hair is
grizzled, that it has been recently cut, and that he uses
lime-cream, are all to be gathered from a close examination of the
lower part of the lining. The lens discloses a large number of
hair-ends, clean cut by the scissors of the barber. They all
appear to be adhesive, and there is a distinct odour of
lime-cream. This dust, you will observe, is not the gritty, grey
dust of the street but the fluffy brown dust of the house,
showing that it has been hung up indoors most of the time, while
the marks of moisture upon the inside are proof positive that the
wearer perspired very freely, and could therefore, hardly be in
the best of training."

"But his wife--you said that she had ceased to love him."

"This hat has not been brushed for weeks. When I see you, my dear
Watson, with a week's accumulation of dust upon your hat, and
when your wife allows you to go out in such a state, I shall fear
that you also have been unfortunate enough to lose your wife's
affection."

"But he might be a bachelor."

"Nay, he was bringing home the goose as a peace-offering to his
wife. Remember the card upon the bird's leg."

"You have an answer to everything. But how on earth do you deduce
that the gas is not laid on in his house?"

"One tallow stain, or even two, might come by chance; but when I
see no less than five, I think that there can be little doubt
that the individual must be brought into frequent contact with
burning tallow--walks upstairs at night probably with his hat in
one hand and a guttering candle in the other. Anyhow, he never
got tallow-stains from a gas-jet. Are you satisfied?"

"Well, it is very ingenious," said I, laughing; "but since, as
you said just now, there has been no crime committed, and no harm
done save the loss of a goose, all this seems to be rather a
waste of energy."

Sherlock Holmes had opened his mouth to reply, when the door flew
open, and Peterson, the commissionaire, rushed into the apartment
with flushed cheeks and the face of a man who is dazed with
astonishment.

"The goose, Mr. Holmes! The goose, sir!" he gasped.

"Eh? What of it, then? Has it returned to life and flapped off
through the kitchen window?" Holmes twisted himself round upon
the sofa to get a fairer view of the man's excited face.

"See here, sir! See what my wife found in its crop!" He held out
his hand and displayed upon the centre of the palm a brilliantly
scintillating blue stone, rather smaller than a bean in size, but
of such purity and radiance that it twinkled like an electric
point in the dark hollow of his hand.

Sherlock Holmes sat up with a whistle. "By Jove, Peterson!" said
he, "this is treasure trove indeed. I suppose you know what you
have got?"

"A diamond, sir? A precious stone. It cuts into glass as though
it were putty."

"It's more than a precious stone. It is the precious stone."

"Not the Countess of Morcar's blue carbuncle!" I ejaculated.

"Precisely so. I ought to know its size and shape, seeing that I
have read the advertisement about it in The Times every day
lately. It is absolutely unique, and its value can only be
conjectured, but the reward offered of 1000 pounds is certainly
not within a twentieth part of the market price."

"A thousand pounds! Great Lord of mercy!" The commissionaire
plumped down into a chair and stared from one to the other of us.

"That is the reward, and I have reason to know that there are
sentimental considerations in the background which would induce
the Countess to part with half her fortune if she could but
recover the gem."

"It was lost, if I remember aright, at the Hotel Cosmopolitan," I
remarked.

"Precisely so, on December 22nd, just five days ago. John Horner,
a plumber, was accused of having abstracted it from the lady's
jewel-case. The evidence against him was so strong that the case
has been referred to the Assizes. I have some account of the
matter here, I believe." He rummaged amid his newspapers,
glancing over the dates, until at last he smoothed one out,
doubled it over, and read the following paragraph:

"Hotel Cosmopolitan Jewel Robbery. John Horner, 26, plumber, was
brought up upon the charge of having upon the 22nd inst.,
abstracted from the jewel-case of the Countess of Morcar the
valuable gem known as the blue carbuncle. James Ryder,
upper-attendant at the hotel, gave his evidence to the effect
that he had shown Horner up to the dressing-room of the Countess
of Morcar upon the day of the robbery in order that he might
solder the second bar of the grate, which was loose. He had
remained with Horner some little time, but had finally been
called away. On returning, he found that Horner had disappeared,
that the bureau had been forced open, and that the small morocco
casket in which, as it afterwards transpired, the Countess was
accustomed to keep her jewel, was lying empty upon the
dressing-table. Ryder instantly gave the alarm, and Horner was
arrested the same evening; but the stone could not be found
either upon his person or in his rooms. Catherine Cusack, maid to
the Countess, deposed to having heard Ryder's cry of dismay on
discovering the robbery, and to having rushed into the room,
where she found matters as described by the last witness.
Inspector Bradstreet, B division, gave evidence as to the arrest
of Horner, who struggled frantically, and protested his innocence
in the strongest terms. Evidence of a previous conviction for
robbery having been given against the prisoner, the magistrate
refused to deal summarily with the offence, but referred it to
the Assizes. Horner, who had shown signs of intense emotion
during the proceedings, fainted away at the conclusion and was
carried out of court."

"Hum! So much for the police-court," said Holmes thoughtfully,
tossing aside the paper. "The question for us now to solve is the
sequence of events leading from a rifled jewel-case at one end to
the crop of a goose in Tottenham Court Road at the other. You
see, Watson, our little deductions have suddenly assumed a much
more important and less innocent aspect. Here is the stone; the
stone came from the goose, and the goose came from Mr. Henry
Baker, the gentleman with the bad hat and all the other
characteristics with which I have bored you. So now we must set
ourselves very seriously to finding this gentleman and
ascertaining what part he has played in this little mystery. To
do this, we must try the simplest means first, and these lie
undoubtedly in an advertisement in all the evening papers. If
this fail, I shall have recourse to other methods."

"What will you say?"

"Give me a pencil and that slip of paper. Now, then: 'Found at
the corner of Goodge Street, a goose and a black felt hat. Mr.
Henry Baker can have the same by applying at 6:30 this evening at
221B, Baker Street.' That is clear and concise."

"Very. But will he see it?"

"Well, he is sure to keep an eye on the papers, since, to a poor
man, the loss was a heavy one. He was clearly so scared by his
mischance in breaking the window and by the approach of Peterson
that he thought of nothing but flight, but since then he must
have bitterly regretted the impulse which caused him to drop his
bird. Then, again, the introduction of his name will cause him to
see it, for everyone who knows him will direct his attention to
it. Here you are, Peterson, run down to the advertising agency
and have this put in the evening papers."

"In which, sir?"

"Oh, in the Globe, Star, Pall Mall, St. James's, Evening News,
Standard, Echo, and any others that occur to you."

"Very well, sir. And this stone?"

"Ah, yes, I shall keep the stone. Thank you. And, I say,
Peterson, just buy a goose on your way back and leave it here
with me, for we must have one to give to this gentleman in place
of the one which your family is now devouring."

When the commissionaire had gone, Holmes took up the stone and
held it against the light. "It's a bonny thing," said he. "Just
see how it glints and sparkles. Of course it is a nucleus and
focus of crime. Every good stone is. They are the devil's pet
baits. In the larger and older jewels every facet may stand for a
bloody deed. This stone is not yet twenty years old. It was found
in the banks of the Amoy River in southern China and is remarkable
in having every characteristic of the carbuncle, save that it is
blue in shade instead of ruby red. In spite of its youth, it has
already a sinister history. There have been two murders, a
vitriol-throwing, a suicide, and several robberies brought about
for the sake of this forty-grain weight of crystallised charcoal.
Who would think that so pretty a toy would be a purveyor to the
gallows and the prison? I'll lock it up in my strong box now and
drop a line to the Countess to say that we have it."

"Do you think that this man Horner is innocent?"

"I cannot tell."

"Well, then, do you imagine that this other one, Henry Baker, had
anything to do with the matter?"

"It is, I think, much more likely that Henry Baker is an
absolutely innocent man, who had no idea that the bird which he
was carrying was of considerably more value than if it were made
of solid gold. That, however, I shall determine by a very simple
test if we have an answer to our advertisement."

"And you can do nothing until then?"

"Nothing."

"In that case I shall continue my professional round. But I shall
come back in the evening at the hour you have mentioned, for I
should like to see the solution of so tangled a business."

"Very glad to see you. I dine at seven. There is a woodcock, I
believe. By the way, in view of recent occurrences, perhaps I
ought to ask Mrs. Hudson to examine its crop."

I had been delayed at a case, and it was a little after half-past
six when I found myself in Baker Street once more. As I
approached the house I saw a tall man in a Scotch bonnet with a
coat which was buttoned up to his chin waiting outside in the
bright semicircle which was thrown from the fanlight. Just as I
arrived the door was opened, and we were shown up together to
Holmes' room.

"Mr. Henry Baker, I believe," said he, rising from his armchair
and greeting his visitor with the easy air of geniality which he
could so readily assume. "Pray take this chair by the fire, Mr.
Baker. It is a cold night, and I observe that your circulation is
more adapted for summer than for winter. Ah, Watson, you have
just come at the right time. Is that your hat, Mr. Baker?"

"Yes, sir, that is undoubtedly my hat."

He was a large man with rounded shoulders, a massive head, and a
broad, intelligent face, sloping down to a pointed beard of
grizzled brown. A touch of red in nose and cheeks, with a slight
tremor of his extended hand, recalled Holmes' surmise as to his
habits. His rusty black frock-coat was buttoned right up in
front, with the collar turned up, and his lank wrists protruded
from his sleeves without a sign of cuff or shirt. He spoke in a
slow staccato fashion, choosing his words with care, and gave the
impression generally of a man of learning and letters who had had
ill-usage at the hands of fortune.

"We have retained these things for some days," said Holmes,
"because we expected to see an advertisement from you giving your
address. I am at a loss to know now why you did not advertise."

Our visitor gave a rather shamefaced laugh. "Shillings have not
been so plentiful with me as they once were," he remarked. "I had
no doubt that the gang of roughs who assaulted me had carried off
both my hat and the bird. I did not care to spend more money in a
hopeless attempt at recovering them."

"Very naturally. By the way, about the bird, we were compelled to
eat it."

"To eat it!" Our visitor half rose from his chair in his
excitement.

"Yes, it would have been of no use to anyone had we not done so.
But I presume that this other goose upon the sideboard, which is
about the same weight and perfectly fresh, will answer your
purpose equally well?"

"Oh, certainly, certainly," answered Mr. Baker with a sigh of
relief.

"Of course, we still have the feathers, legs, crop, and so on of
your own bird, so if you wish--"

The man burst into a hearty laugh. "They might be useful to me as
relics of my adventure," said he, "but beyond that I can hardly
see what use the disjecta membra of my late acquaintance are
going to be to me. No, sir, I think that, with your permission, I
will confine my attentions to the excellent bird which I perceive
upon the sideboard."

Sherlock Holmes glanced sharply across at me with a slight shrug
of his shoulders.

"There is your hat, then, and there your bird," said he. "By the
way, would it bore you to tell me where you got the other one
from? I am somewhat of a fowl fancier, and I have seldom seen a
better grown goose."

"Certainly, sir," said Baker, who had risen and tucked his newly
gained property under his arm. "There are a few of us who
frequent the Alpha Inn, near the Museum--we are to be found in
the Museum itself during the day, you understand. This year our
good host, Windigate by name, instituted a goose club, by which,
on consideration of some few pence every week, we were each to
receive a bird at Christmas. My pence were duly paid, and the
rest is familiar to you. I am much indebted to you, sir, for a
Scotch bonnet is fitted neither to my years nor my gravity." With
a comical pomposity of manner he bowed solemnly to both of us and
strode off upon his way.

"So much for Mr. Henry Baker," said Holmes when he had closed the
door behind him. "It is quite certain that he knows nothing
whatever about the matter. Are you hungry, Watson?"

"Not particularly."

"Then I suggest that we turn our dinner into a supper and follow
up this clue while it is still hot."

"By all means."

It was a bitter night, so we drew on our ulsters and wrapped
cravats about our throats. Outside, the stars were shining coldly
in a cloudless sky, and the breath of the passers-by blew out
into smoke like so many pistol shots. Our footfalls rang out
crisply and loudly as we swung through the doctors' quarter,
Wimpole Street, Harley Street, and so through Wigmore Street into
Oxford Street. In a quarter of an hour we were in Bloomsbury at
the Alpha Inn, which is a small public-house at the corner of one
of the streets which runs down into Holborn. Holmes pushed open
the door of the private bar and ordered two glasses of beer from
the ruddy-faced, white-aproned landlord.

"Your beer should be excellent if it is as good as your geese,"
said he.

"My geese!" The man seemed surprised.

"Yes. I was speaking only half an hour ago to Mr. Henry Baker,
who was a member of your goose club."

"Ah! yes, I see. But you see, sir, them's not our geese."

"Indeed! Whose, then?"

"Well, I got the two dozen from a salesman in Covent Garden."

"Indeed? I know some of them. Which was it?"

"Breckinridge is his name."

"Ah! I don't know him. Well, here's your good health landlord,
and prosperity to your house. Good-night."

"Now for Mr. Breckinridge," he continued, buttoning up his coat
as we came out into the frosty air. "Remember, Watson that though
we have so homely a thing as a goose at one end of this chain, we
have at the other a man who will certainly get seven years' penal
servitude unless we can establish his innocence. It is possible
that our inquiry may but confirm his guilt; but, in any case, we
have a line of investigation which has been missed by the police,
and which a singular chance has placed in our hands. Let us
follow it out to the bitter end. Faces to the south, then, and
quick march!"

We passed across Holborn, down Endell Street, and so through a
zigzag of slums to Covent Garden Market. One of the largest
stalls bore the name of Breckinridge upon it, and the proprietor
a horsey-looking man, with a sharp face and trim side-whiskers was
helping a boy to put up the shutters.

"Good-evening. It's a cold night," said Holmes.

The salesman nodded and shot a questioning glance at my
companion.

"Sold out of geese, I see," continued Holmes, pointing at the
bare slabs of marble.

"Let you have five hundred to-morrow morning."

"That's no good."

"Well, there are some on the stall with the gas-flare."

"Ah, but I was recommended to you."

"Who by?"

"The landlord of the Alpha."

"Oh, yes; I sent him a couple of dozen."

"Fine birds they were, too. Now where did you get them from?"

To my surprise the question provoked a burst of anger from the
salesman.

"Now, then, mister," said he, with his head cocked and his arms
akimbo, "what are you driving at? Let's have it straight, now."

"It is straight enough. I should like to know who sold you the
geese which you supplied to the Alpha."

"Well then, I shan't tell you. So now!"

"Oh, it is a matter of no importance; but I don't know why you
should be so warm over such a trifle."

"Warm! You'd be as warm, maybe, if you were as pestered as I am.
When I pay good money for a good article there should be an end
of the business; but it's 'Where are the geese?' and 'Who did you
sell the geese to?' and 'What will you take for the geese?' One
would think they were the only geese in the world, to hear the
fuss that is made over them."

"Well, I have no connection with any other people who have been
making inquiries," said Holmes carelessly. "If you won't tell us
the bet is off, that is all. But I'm always ready to back my
opinion on a matter of fowls, and I have a fiver on it that the
bird I ate is country bred."

"Well, then, you've lost your fiver, for it's town bred," snapped
the salesman.

"It's nothing of the kind."

"I say it is."

"I don't believe it."

"D'you think you know more about fowls than I, who have handled
them ever since I was a nipper? I tell you, all those birds that
went to the Alpha were town bred."

"You'll never persuade me to believe that."

"Will you bet, then?"

"It's merely taking your money, for I know that I am right. But
I'll have a sovereign on with you, just to teach you not to be
obstinate."

The salesman chuckled grimly. "Bring me the books, Bill," said
he.

The small boy brought round a small thin volume and a great
greasy-backed one, laying them out together beneath the hanging
lamp.

"Now then, Mr. Cocksure," said the salesman, "I thought that I
was out of geese, but before I finish you'll find that there is
still one left in my shop. You see this little book?"

"Well?"

"That's the list of the folk from whom I buy. D'you see? Well,
then, here on this page are the country folk, and the numbers
after their names are where their accounts are in the big ledger.
Now, then! You see this other page in red ink? Well, that is a
list of my town suppliers. Now, look at that third name. Just
read it out to me."

"Mrs. Oakshott, 117, Brixton Road--249," read Holmes.

"Quite so. Now turn that up in the ledger."

Holmes turned to the page indicated. "Here you are, 'Mrs.
Oakshott, 117, Brixton Road, egg and poultry supplier.'"

"Now, then, what's the last entry?"

"'December 22nd. Twenty-four geese at 7s. 6d.'"

"Quite so. There you are. And underneath?"

"'Sold to Mr. Windigate of the Alpha, at 12s.'"

"What have you to say now?"

Sherlock Holmes looked deeply chagrined. He drew a sovereign from
his pocket and threw it down upon the slab, turning away with the
air of a man whose disgust is too deep for words. A few yards off
he stopped under a lamp-post and laughed in the hearty, noiseless
fashion which was peculiar to him.

"When you see a man with whiskers of that cut and the 'Pink 'un'
protruding out of his pocket, you can always draw him by a bet,"
said he. "I daresay that if I had put 100 pounds down in front of
him, that man would not have given me such complete information
as was drawn from him by the idea that he was doing me on a
wager. Well, Watson, we are, I fancy, nearing the end of our
quest, and the only point which remains to be determined is
whether we should go on to this Mrs. Oakshott to-night, or
whether we should reserve it for to-morrow. It is clear from what
that surly fellow said that there are others besides ourselves
who are anxious about the matter, and I should--"

His remarks were suddenly cut short by a loud hubbub which broke
out from the stall which we had just left. Turning round we saw a
little rat-faced fellow standing in the centre of the circle of
yellow light which was thrown by the swinging lamp, while
Breckinridge, the salesman, framed in the door of his stall, was
shaking his fists fiercely at the cringing figure.

"I've had enough of you and your geese," he shouted. "I wish you
were all at the devil together. If you come pestering me any more
with your silly talk I'll set the dog at you. You bring Mrs.
Oakshott here and I'll answer her, but what have you to do with
it? Did I buy the geese off you?"

"No; but one of them was mine all the same," whined the little
man.

"Well, then, ask Mrs. Oakshott for it."

"She told me to ask you."

"Well, you can ask the King of Proosia, for all I care. I've had
enough of it. Get out of this!" He rushed fiercely forward, and
the inquirer flitted away into the darkness.

"Ha! this may save us a visit to Brixton Road," whispered Holmes.
"Come with me, and we will see what is to be made of this
fellow." Striding through the scattered knots of people who
lounged round the flaring stalls, my companion speedily overtook
the little man and touched him upon the shoulder. He sprang
round, and I could see in the gas-light that every vestige of
colour had been driven from his face.

"Who are you, then? What do you want?" he asked in a quavering
voice.

"You will excuse me," said Holmes blandly, "but I could not help
overhearing the questions which you put to the salesman just now.
I think that I could be of assistance to you."

"You? Who are you? How could you know anything of the matter?"

"My name is Sherlock Holmes. It is my business to know what other
people don't know."

"But you can know nothing of this?"

"Excuse me, I know everything of it. You are endeavouring to
trace some geese which were sold by Mrs. Oakshott, of Brixton
Road, to a salesman named Breckinridge, by him in turn to Mr.
Windigate, of the Alpha, and by him to his club, of which Mr.
Henry Baker is a member."

"Oh, sir, you are the very man whom I have longed to meet," cried
the little fellow with outstretched hands and quivering fingers.
"I can hardly explain to you how interested I am in this matter."

Sherlock Holmes hailed a four-wheeler which was passing. "In that
case we had better discuss it in a cosy room rather than in this
wind-swept market-place," said he. "But pray tell me, before we
go farther, who it is that I have the pleasure of assisting."

The man hesitated for an instant. "My name is John Robinson," he
answered with a sidelong glance.

"No, no; the real name," said Holmes sweetly. "It is always
awkward doing business with an alias."

A flush sprang to the white cheeks of the stranger. "Well then,"
said he, "my real name is James Ryder."

"Precisely so. Head attendant at the Hotel Cosmopolitan. Pray
step into the cab, and I shall soon be able to tell you
everything which you would wish to know."

The little man stood glancing from one to the other of us with
half-frightened, half-hopeful eyes, as one who is not sure
whether he is on the verge of a windfall or of a catastrophe.
Then he stepped into the cab, and in half an hour we were back in
the sitting-room at Baker Street. Nothing had been said during
our drive, but the high, thin breathing of our new companion, and
the claspings and unclaspings of his hands, spoke of the nervous
tension within him.

"Here we are!" said Holmes cheerily as we filed into the room.
"The fire looks very seasonable in this weather. You look cold,
Mr. Ryder. Pray take the basket-chair. I will just put on my
slippers before we settle this little matter of yours. Now, then!
You want to know what became of those geese?"

"Yes, sir."

"Or rather, I fancy, of that goose. It was one bird, I imagine in
which you were interested--white, with a black bar across the
tail."

Ryder quivered with emotion. "Oh, sir," he cried, "can you tell
me where it went to?"

"It came here."

"Here?"

"Yes, and a most remarkable bird it proved. I don't wonder that
you should take an interest in it. It laid an egg after it was
dead--the bonniest, brightest little blue egg that ever was seen.
I have it here in my museum."

Our visitor staggered to his feet and clutched the mantelpiece
with his right hand. Holmes unlocked his strong-box and held up
the blue carbuncle, which shone out like a star, with a cold,
brilliant, many-pointed radiance. Ryder stood glaring with a
drawn face, uncertain whether to claim or to disown it.

"The game's up, Ryder," said Holmes quietly. "Hold up, man, or
you'll be into the fire! Give him an arm back into his chair,
Watson. He's not got blood enough to go in for felony with
impunity. Give him a dash of brandy. So! Now he looks a little
more human. What a shrimp it is, to be sure!"

For a moment he had staggered and nearly fallen, but the brandy
brought a tinge of colour into his cheeks, and he sat staring
with frightened eyes at his accuser.

"I have almost every link in my hands, and all the proofs which I
could possibly need, so there is little which you need tell me.
Still, that little may as well be cleared up to make the case
complete. You had heard, Ryder, of this blue stone of the
Countess of Morcar's?"

"It was Catherine Cusack who told me of it," said he in a
crackling voice.

"I see--her ladyship's waiting-maid. Well, the temptation of
sudden wealth so easily acquired was too much for you, as it has
been for better men before you; but you were not very scrupulous
in the means you used. It seems to me, Ryder, that there is the
making of a very pretty villain in you. You knew that this man
Horner, the plumber, had been concerned in some such matter
before, and that suspicion would rest the more readily upon him.
What did you do, then? You made some small job in my lady's
room--you and your confederate Cusack--and you managed that he
should be the man sent for. Then, when he had left, you rifled
the jewel-case, raised the alarm, and had this unfortunate man
arrested. You then--"

Ryder threw himself down suddenly upon the rug and clutched at my
companion's knees. "For God's sake, have mercy!" he shrieked.
"Think of my father! Of my mother! It would break their hearts. I
never went wrong before! I never will again. I swear it. I'll
swear it on a Bible. Oh, don't bring it into court! For Christ's
sake, don't!"

"Get back into your chair!" said Holmes sternly. "It is very well
to cringe and crawl now, but you thought little enough of this
poor Horner in the dock for a crime of which he knew nothing."

"I will fly, Mr. Holmes. I will leave the country, sir. Then the
charge against him will break down."

"Hum! We will talk about that. And now let us hear a true account
of the next act. How came the stone into the goose, and how came
the goose into the open market? Tell us the truth, for there lies
your only hope of safety."

Ryder passed his tongue over his parched lips. "I will tell you
it just as it happened, sir," said he. "When Horner had been
arrested, it seemed to me that it would be best for me to get
away with the stone at once, for I did not know at what moment
the police might not take it into their heads to search me and my
room. There was no place about the hotel where it would be safe.
I went out, as if on some commission, and I made for my sister's
house. She had married a man named Oakshott, and lived in Brixton
Road, where she fattened fowls for the market. All the way there
every man I met seemed to me to be a policeman or a detective;
and, for all that it was a cold night, the sweat was pouring down
my face before I came to the Brixton Road. My sister asked me
what was the matter, and why I was so pale; but I told her that I
had been upset by the jewel robbery at the hotel. Then I went
into the back yard and smoked a pipe and wondered what it would
be best to do.

"I had a friend once called Maudsley, who went to the bad, and
has just been serving his time in Pentonville. One day he had met
me, and fell into talk about the ways of thieves, and how they
could get rid of what they stole. I knew that he would be true to
me, for I knew one or two things about him; so I made up my mind
to go right on to Kilburn, where he lived, and take him into my
confidence. He would show me how to turn the stone into money.
But how to get to him in safety? I thought of the agonies I had
gone through in coming from the hotel. I might at any moment be
seized and searched, and there would be the stone in my waistcoat
pocket. I was leaning against the wall at the time and looking at
the geese which were waddling about round my feet, and suddenly
an idea came into my head which showed me how I could beat the
best detective that ever lived.

"My sister had told me some weeks before that I might have the
pick of her geese for a Christmas present, and I knew that she
was always as good as her word. I would take my goose now, and in
it I would carry my stone to Kilburn. There was a little shed in
the yard, and behind this I drove one of the birds--a fine big
one, white, with a barred tail. I caught it, and prying its bill
open, I thrust the stone down its throat as far as my finger
could reach. The bird gave a gulp, and I felt the stone pass
along its gullet and down into its crop. But the creature flapped
and struggled, and out came my sister to know what was the
matter. As I turned to speak to her the brute broke loose and
fluttered off among the others.

"'Whatever were you doing with that bird, Jem?' says she.

"'Well,' said I, 'you said you'd give me one for Christmas, and I
was feeling which was the fattest.'

"'Oh,' says she, 'we've set yours aside for you--Jem's bird, we
call it. It's the big white one over yonder. There's twenty-six
of them, which makes one for you, and one for us, and two dozen
for the market.'

"'Thank you, Maggie,' says I; 'but if it is all the same to you,
I'd rather have that one I was handling just now.'

"'The other is a good three pound heavier,' said she, 'and we
fattened it expressly for you.'

"'Never mind. I'll have the other, and I'll take it now,' said I.

"'Oh, just as you like,' said she, a little huffed. 'Which is it
you want, then?'

"'That white one with the barred tail, right in the middle of the
flock.'

"'Oh, very well. Kill it and take it with you.'

"Well, I did what she said, Mr. Holmes, and I carried the bird
all the way to Kilburn. I told my pal what I had done, for he was
a man that it was easy to tell a thing like that to. He laughed
until he choked, and we got a knife and opened the goose. My
heart turned to water, for there was no sign of the stone, and I
knew that some terrible mistake had occurred. I left the bird,
rushed back to my sister's, and hurried into the back yard. There
was not a bird to be seen there.

"'Where are they all, Maggie?' I cried.

"'Gone to the dealer's, Jem.'

"'Which dealer's?'

"'Breckinridge, of Covent Garden.'

"'But was there another with a barred tail?' I asked, 'the same
as the one I chose?'

"'Yes, Jem; there were two barred-tailed ones, and I could never
tell them apart.'

"Well, then, of course I saw it all, and I ran off as hard as my
feet would carry me to this man Breckinridge; but he had sold the
lot at once, and not one word would he tell me as to where they
had gone. You heard him yourselves to-night. Well, he has always
answered me like that. My sister thinks that I am going mad.
Sometimes I think that I am myself. And now--and now I am myself
a branded thief, without ever having touched the wealth for which
I sold my character. God help me! God help me!" He burst into
convulsive sobbing, with his face buried in his hands.

There was a long silence, broken only by his heavy breathing and
by the measured tapping of Sherlock Holmes' finger-tips upon the
edge of the table. Then my friend rose and threw open the door.

"Get out!" said he.

"What, sir! Oh, Heaven bless you!"

"No more words. Get out!"

And no more words were needed. There was a rush, a clatter upon
the stairs, the bang of a door, and the crisp rattle of running
footfalls from the street.

"After all, Watson," said Holmes, reaching up his hand for his
clay pipe, "I am not retained by the police to supply their
deficiencies. If Horner were in danger it would be another thing;
but this fellow will not appear against him, and the case must
collapse. I suppose that I am commuting a felony, but it is just
possible that I am saving a soul. This fellow will not go wrong
again; he is too terribly frightened. Send him to gaol now, and
you make him a gaol-bird for life. Besides, it is the season of
forgiveness. Chance has put in our way a most singular and
whimsical problem, and its solution is its own reward. If you
will have the goodness to touch the bell, Doctor, we will begin
another investigation, in which, also a bird will be the chief
feature."



VIII. THE ADVENTURE OF THE SPECKLED BAND

On glancing over my notes of the seventy odd cases in which I
have during the last eight years studied the methods of my friend
Sherlock Holmes, I find many tragic, some comic, a large number
merely strange, but none commonplace; for, working as he did
rather for the love of his art than for the acquirement of
wealth, he refused to associate himself with any investigation
which did not tend towards the unusual, and even the fantastic.
Of all these varied cases, however, I cannot recall any which
presented more singular features than that which was associated
with the well-known Surrey family of the Roylotts of Stoke Moran.
The events in question occurred in the early days of my
association with Holmes, when we were sharing rooms as bachelors
in Baker Street. It is possible that I might have placed them
upon record before, but a promise of secrecy was made at the
time, from which I have only been freed during the last month by
the untimely death of the lady to whom the pledge was given. It
is perhaps as well that the facts should now come to light, for I
have reasons to know that there are widespread rumours as to the
death of Dr. Grimesby Roylott which tend to make the matter even
more terrible than the truth.

It was early in April in the year '83 that I woke one morning to
find Sherlock Holmes standing, fully dressed, by the side of my
bed. He was a late riser, as a rule, and as the clock on the
mantelpiece showed me that it was only a quarter-past seven, I
blinked up at him in some surprise, and perhaps just a little
resentment, for I was myself regular in my habits.

"Very sorry to knock you up, Watson," said he, "but it's the
common lot this morning. Mrs. Hudson has been knocked up, she
retorted upon me, and I on you."

"What is it, then--a fire?"

"No; a client. It seems that a young lady has arrived in a
considerable state of excitement, who insists upon seeing me. She
is waiting now in the sitting-room. Now, when young ladies wander
about the metropolis at this hour of the morning, and knock
sleepy people up out of their beds, I presume that it is
something very pressing which they have to communicate. Should it
prove to be an interesting case, you would, I am sure, wish to
follow it from the outset. I thought, at any rate, that I should
call you and give you the chance."

"My dear fellow, I would not miss it for anything."

I had no keener pleasure than in following Holmes in his
professional investigations, and in admiring the rapid
deductions, as swift as intuitions, and yet always founded on a
logical basis with which he unravelled the problems which were
submitted to him. I rapidly threw on my clothes and was ready in
a few minutes to accompany my friend down to the sitting-room. A
lady dressed in black and heavily veiled, who had been sitting in
the window, rose as we entered.

"Good-morning, madam," said Holmes cheerily. "My name is Sherlock
Holmes. This is my intimate friend and associate, Dr. Watson,
before whom you can speak as freely as before myself. Ha! I am
glad to see that Mrs. Hudson has had the good sense to light the
fire. Pray draw up to it, and I shall order you a cup of hot
coffee, for I observe that you are shivering."

"It is not cold which makes me shiver," said the woman in a low
voice, changing her seat as requested.

"What, then?"

"It is fear, Mr. Holmes. It is terror." She raised her veil as
she spoke, and we could see that she was indeed in a pitiable
state of agitation, her face all drawn and grey, with restless
frightened eyes, like those of some hunted animal. Her features
and figure were those of a woman of thirty, but her hair was shot
with premature grey, and her expression was weary and haggard.
Sherlock Holmes ran her over with one of his quick,
all-comprehensive glances.

"You must not fear," said he soothingly, bending forward and
patting her forearm. "We shall soon set matters right, I have no
doubt. You have come in by train this morning, I see."

"You know me, then?"

"No, but I observe the second half of a return ticket in the palm
of your left glove. You must have started early, and yet you had
a good drive in a dog-cart, along heavy roads, before you reached
the station."

The lady gave a violent start and stared in bewilderment at my
companion.

"There is no mystery, my dear madam," said he, smiling. "The left
arm of your jacket is spattered with mud in no less than seven
places. The marks are perfectly fresh. There is no vehicle save a
dog-cart which throws up mud in that way, and then only when you
sit on the left-hand side of the driver."

"Whatever your reasons may be, you are perfectly correct," said
she. "I started from home before six, reached Leatherhead at
twenty past, and came in by the first train to Waterloo. Sir, I
can stand this strain no longer; I shall go mad if it continues.
I have no one to turn to--none, save only one, who cares for me,
and he, poor fellow, can be of little aid. I have heard of you,
Mr. Holmes; I have heard of you from Mrs. Farintosh, whom you
helped in the hour of her sore need. It was from her that I had
your address. Oh, sir, do you not think that you could help me,
too, and at least throw a little light through the dense darkness
which surrounds me? At present it is out of my power to reward
you for your services, but in a month or six weeks I shall be
married, with the control of my own income, and then at least you
shall not find me ungrateful."

Holmes turned to his desk and, unlocking it, drew out a small
case-book, which he consulted.

"Farintosh," said he. "Ah yes, I recall the case; it was
concerned with an opal tiara. I think it was before your time,
Watson. I can only say, madam, that I shall be happy to devote
the same care to your case as I did to that of your friend. As to
reward, my profession is its own reward; but you are at liberty
to defray whatever expenses I may be put to, at the time which
suits you best. And now I beg that you will lay before us
everything that may help us in forming an opinion upon the
matter."

"Alas!" replied our visitor, "the very horror of my situation
lies in the fact that my fears are so vague, and my suspicions
depend so entirely upon small points, which might seem trivial to
another, that even he to whom of all others I have a right to
look for help and advice looks upon all that I tell him about it
as the fancies of a nervous woman. He does not say so, but I can
read it from his soothing answers and averted eyes. But I have
heard, Mr. Holmes, that you can see deeply into the manifold
wickedness of the human heart. You may advise me how to walk amid
the dangers which encompass me."

"I am all attention, madam."

"My name is Helen Stoner, and I am living with my stepfather, who
is the last survivor of one of the oldest Saxon families in
England, the Roylotts of Stoke Moran, on the western border of
Surrey."

Holmes nodded his head. "The name is familiar to me," said he.

"The family was at one time among the richest in England, and the
estates extended over the borders into Berkshire in the north,
and Hampshire in the west. In the last century, however, four
successive heirs were of a dissolute and wasteful disposition,
and the family ruin was eventually completed by a gambler in the
days of the Regency. Nothing was left save a few acres of ground,
and the two-hundred-year-old house, which is itself crushed under
a heavy mortgage. The last squire dragged out his existence
there, living the horrible life of an aristocratic pauper; but
his only son, my stepfather, seeing that he must adapt himself to
the new conditions, obtained an advance from a relative, which
enabled him to take a medical degree and went out to Calcutta,
where, by his professional skill and his force of character, he
established a large practice. In a fit of anger, however, caused
by some robberies which had been perpetrated in the house, he
beat his native butler to death and narrowly escaped a capital
sentence. As it was, he suffered a long term of imprisonment and
afterwards returned to England a morose and disappointed man.

"When Dr. Roylott was in India he married my mother, Mrs. Stoner,
the young widow of Major-General Stoner, of the Bengal Artillery.
My sister Julia and I were twins, and we were only two years old
at the time of my mother's re-marriage. She had a considerable
sum of money--not less than 1000 pounds a year--and this she
bequeathed to Dr. Roylott entirely while we resided with him,
with a provision that a certain annual sum should be allowed to
each of us in the event of our marriage. Shortly after our return
to England my mother died--she was killed eight years ago in a
railway accident near Crewe. Dr. Roylott then abandoned his
attempts to establish himself in practice in London and took us
to live with him in the old ancestral house at Stoke Moran. The
money which my mother had left was enough for all our wants, and
there seemed to be no obstacle to our happiness.

"But a terrible change came over our stepfather about this time.
Instead of making friends and exchanging visits with our
neighbours, who had at first been overjoyed to see a Roylott of
Stoke Moran back in the old family seat, he shut himself up in
his house and seldom came out save to indulge in ferocious
quarrels with whoever might cross his path. Violence of temper
approaching to mania has been hereditary in the men of the
family, and in my stepfather's case it had, I believe, been
intensified by his long residence in the tropics. A series of
disgraceful brawls took place, two of which ended in the
police-court, until at last he became the terror of the village,
and the folks would fly at his approach, for he is a man of
immense strength, and absolutely uncontrollable in his anger.

"Last week he hurled the local blacksmith over a parapet into a
stream, and it was only by paying over all the money which I
could gather together that I was able to avert another public
exposure. He had no friends at all save the wandering gipsies,
and he would give these vagabonds leave to encamp upon the few
acres of bramble-covered land which represent the family estate,
and would accept in return the hospitality of their tents,
wandering away with them sometimes for weeks on end. He has a
passion also for Indian animals, which are sent over to him by a
correspondent, and he has at this moment a cheetah and a baboon,
which wander freely over his grounds and are feared by the
villagers almost as much as their master.

"You can imagine from what I say that my poor sister Julia and I
had no great pleasure in our lives. No servant would stay with
us, and for a long time we did all the work of the house. She was
but thirty at the time of her death, and yet her hair had already
begun to whiten, even as mine has."

"Your sister is dead, then?"

"She died just two years ago, and it is of her death that I wish
to speak to you. You can understand that, living the life which I
have described, we were little likely to see anyone of our own
age and position. We had, however, an aunt, my mother's maiden
sister, Miss Honoria Westphail, who lives near Harrow, and we
were occasionally allowed to pay short visits at this lady's
house. Julia went there at Christmas two years ago, and met there
a half-pay major of marines, to whom she became engaged. My
stepfather learned of the engagement when my sister returned and
offered no objection to the marriage; but within a fortnight of
the day which had been fixed for the wedding, the terrible event
occurred which has deprived me of my only companion."

Sherlock Holmes had been leaning back in his chair with his eyes
closed and his head sunk in a cushion, but he half opened his
lids now and glanced across at his visitor.

"Pray be precise as to details," said he.

"It is easy for me to be so, for every event of that dreadful
time is seared into my memory. The manor-house is, as I have
already said, very old, and only one wing is now inhabited. The
bedrooms in this wing are on the ground floor, the sitting-rooms
being in the central block of the buildings. Of these bedrooms
the first is Dr. Roylott's, the second my sister's, and the third
my own. There is no communication between them, but they all open
out into the same corridor. Do I make myself plain?"

"Perfectly so."

"The windows of the three rooms open out upon the lawn. That
fatal night Dr. Roylott had gone to his room early, though we
knew that he had not retired to rest, for my sister was troubled
by the smell of the strong Indian cigars which it was his custom
to smoke. She left her room, therefore, and came into mine, where
she sat for some time, chatting about her approaching wedding. At
eleven o'clock she rose to leave me, but she paused at the door
and looked back.

"'Tell me, Helen,' said she, 'have you ever heard anyone whistle
in the dead of the night?'

"'Never,' said I.

"'I suppose that you could not possibly whistle, yourself, in
your sleep?'

"'Certainly not. But why?'

"'Because during the last few nights I have always, about three
in the morning, heard a low, clear whistle. I am a light sleeper,
and it has awakened me. I cannot tell where it came from--perhaps
from the next room, perhaps from the lawn. I thought that I would
just ask you whether you had heard it.'

"'No, I have not. It must be those wretched gipsies in the
plantation.'

"'Very likely. And yet if it were on the lawn, I wonder that you
did not hear it also.'

"'Ah, but I sleep more heavily than you.'

"'Well, it is of no great consequence, at any rate.' She smiled
back at me, closed my door, and a few moments later I heard her
key turn in the lock."

"Indeed," said Holmes. "Was it your custom always to lock
yourselves in at night?"

"Always."

"And why?"

"I think that I mentioned to you that the doctor kept a cheetah
and a baboon. We had no feeling of security unless our doors were
locked."

"Quite so. Pray proceed with your statement."

"I could not sleep that night. A vague feeling of impending
misfortune impressed me. My sister and I, you will recollect,
were twins, and you know how subtle are the links which bind two
souls which are so closely allied. It was a wild night. The wind
was howling outside, and the rain was beating and splashing
against the windows. Suddenly, amid all the hubbub of the gale,
there burst forth the wild scream of a terrified woman. I knew
that it was my sister's voice. I sprang from my bed, wrapped a
shawl round me, and rushed into the corridor. As I opened my door
I seemed to hear a low whistle, such as my sister described, and
a few moments later a clanging sound, as if a mass of metal had
fallen. As I ran down the passage, my sister's door was unlocked,
and revolved slowly upon its hinges. I stared at it
horror-stricken, not knowing what was about to issue from it. By
the light of the corridor-lamp I saw my sister appear at the
opening, her face blanched with terror, her hands groping for
help, her whole figure swaying to and fro like that of a
drunkard. I ran to her and threw my arms round her, but at that
moment her knees seemed to give way and she fell to the ground.
She writhed as one who is in terrible pain, and her limbs were
dreadfully convulsed. At first I thought that she had not
recognised me, but as I bent over her she suddenly shrieked out
in a voice which I shall never forget, 'Oh, my God! Helen! It was
the band! The speckled band!' There was something else which she
would fain have said, and she stabbed with her finger into the
air in the direction of the doctor's room, but a fresh convulsion
seized her and choked her words. I rushed out, calling loudly for
my stepfather, and I met him hastening from his room in his
dressing-gown. When he reached my sister's side she was
unconscious, and though he poured brandy down her throat and sent
for medical aid from the village, all efforts were in vain, for
she slowly sank and died without having recovered her
consciousness. Such was the dreadful end of my beloved sister."

"One moment," said Holmes, "are you sure about this whistle and
metallic sound? Could you swear to it?"

"That was what the county coroner asked me at the inquiry. It is
my strong impression that I heard it, and yet, among the crash of
the gale and the creaking of an old house, I may possibly have
been deceived."

"Was your sister dressed?"

"No, she was in her night-dress. In her right hand was found the
charred stump of a match, and in her left a match-box."

"Showing that she had struck a light and looked about her when
the alarm took place. That is important. And what conclusions did
the coroner come to?"

"He investigated the case with great care, for Dr. Roylott's
conduct had long been notorious in the county, but he was unable
to find any satisfactory cause of death. My evidence showed that
the door had been fastened upon the inner side, and the windows
were blocked by old-fashioned shutters with broad iron bars,
which were secured every night. The walls were carefully sounded,
and were shown to be quite solid all round, and the flooring was
also thoroughly examined, with the same result. The chimney is
wide, but is barred up by four large staples. It is certain,
therefore, that my sister was quite alone when she met her end.
Besides, there were no marks of any violence upon her."

"How about poison?"

"The doctors examined her for it, but without success."

"What do you think that this unfortunate lady died of, then?"

"It is my belief that she died of pure fear and nervous shock,
though what it was that frightened her I cannot imagine."

"Were there gipsies in the plantation at the time?"

"Yes, there are nearly always some there."

"Ah, and what did you gather from this allusion to a band--a
speckled band?"

"Sometimes I have thought that it was merely the wild talk of
delirium, sometimes that it may have referred to some band of
people, perhaps to these very gipsies in the plantation. I do not
know whether the spotted handkerchiefs which so many of them wear
over their heads might have suggested the strange adjective which
she used."

Holmes shook his head like a man who is far from being satisfied.

"These are very deep waters," said he; "pray go on with your
narrative."

"Two years have passed since then, and my life has been until
lately lonelier than ever. A month ago, however, a dear friend,
whom I have known for many years, has done me the honour to ask
my hand in marriage. His name is Armitage--Percy Armitage--the
second son of Mr. Armitage, of Crane Water, near Reading. My
stepfather has offered no opposition to the match, and we are to
be married in the course of the spring. Two days ago some repairs
were started in the west wing of the building, and my bedroom
wall has been pierced, so that I have had to move into the
chamber in which my sister died, and to sleep in the very bed in
which she slept. Imagine, then, my thrill of terror when last
night, as I lay awake, thinking over her terrible fate, I
suddenly heard in the silence of the night the low whistle which
had been the herald of her own death. I sprang up and lit the
lamp, but nothing was to be seen in the room. I was too shaken to
go to bed again, however, so I dressed, and as soon as it was
daylight I slipped down, got a dog-cart at the Crown Inn, which
is opposite, and drove to Leatherhead, from whence I have come on
this morning with the one object of seeing you and asking your
advice."

"You have done wisely," said my friend. "But have you told me
all?"

"Yes, all."

"Miss Roylott, you have not. You are screening your stepfather."

"Why, what do you mean?"

For answer Holmes pushed back the frill of black lace which
fringed the hand that lay upon our visitor's knee. Five little
livid spots, the marks of four fingers and a thumb, were printed
upon the white wrist.

"You have been cruelly used," said Holmes.

The lady coloured deeply and covered over her injured wrist. "He
is a hard man," she said, "and perhaps he hardly knows his own
strength."

There was a long silence, during which Holmes leaned his chin
upon his hands and stared into the crackling fire.

"This is a very deep business," he said at last. "There are a
thousand details which I should desire to know before I decide
upon our course of action. Yet we have not a moment to lose. If
we were to come to Stoke Moran to-day, would it be possible for
us to see over these rooms without the knowledge of your
stepfather?"

"As it happens, he spoke of coming into town to-day upon some
most important business. It is probable that he will be away all
day, and that there would be nothing to disturb you. We have a
housekeeper now, but she is old and foolish, and I could easily
get her out of the way."

"Excellent. You are not averse to this trip, Watson?"

"By no means."

"Then we shall both come. What are you going to do yourself?"

"I have one or two things which I would wish to do now that I am
in town. But I shall return by the twelve o'clock train, so as to
be there in time for your coming."

"And you may expect us early in the afternoon. I have myself some
small business matters to attend to. Will you not wait and
breakfast?"

"No, I must go. My heart is lightened already since I have
confided my trouble to you. I shall look forward to seeing you
again this afternoon." She dropped her thick black veil over her
face and glided from the room.

"And what do you think of it all, Watson?" asked Sherlock Holmes,
leaning back in his chair.

"It seems to me to be a most dark and sinister business."

"Dark enough and sinister enough."

"Yet if the lady is correct in saying that the flooring and walls
are sound, and that the door, window, and chimney are impassable,
then her sister must have been undoubtedly alone when she met her
mysterious end."

"What becomes, then, of these nocturnal whistles, and what of the
very peculiar words of the dying woman?"

"I cannot think."

"When you combine the ideas of whistles at night, the presence of
a band of gipsies who are on intimate terms with this old doctor,
the fact that we have every reason to believe that the doctor has
an interest in preventing his stepdaughter's marriage, the dying
allusion to a band, and, finally, the fact that Miss Helen Stoner
heard a metallic clang, which might have been caused by one of
those metal bars that secured the shutters falling back into its
place, I think that there is good ground to think that the
mystery may be cleared along those lines."

"But what, then, did the gipsies do?"

"I cannot imagine."

"I see many objections to any such theory."

"And so do I. It is precisely for that reason that we are going
to Stoke Moran this day. I want to see whether the objections are
fatal, or if they may be explained away. But what in the name of
the devil!"

The ejaculation had been drawn from my companion by the fact that
our door had been suddenly dashed open, and that a huge man had
framed himself in the aperture. His costume was a peculiar
mixture of the professional and of the agricultural, having a
black top-hat, a long frock-coat, and a pair of high gaiters,
with a hunting-crop swinging in his hand. So tall was he that his
hat actually brushed the cross bar of the doorway, and his
breadth seemed to span it across from side to side. A large face,
seared with a thousand wrinkles, burned yellow with the sun, and
marked with every evil passion, was turned from one to the other
of us, while his deep-set, bile-shot eyes, and his high, thin,
fleshless nose, gave him somewhat the resemblance to a fierce old
bird of prey.

"Which of you is Holmes?" asked this apparition.

"My name, sir; but you have the advantage of me," said my
companion quietly.

"I am Dr. Grimesby Roylott, of Stoke Moran."

"Indeed, Doctor," said Holmes blandly. "Pray take a seat."

"I will do nothing of the kind. My stepdaughter has been here. I
have traced her. What has she been saying to you?"

"It is a little cold for the time of the year," said Holmes.

"What has she been saying to you?" screamed the old man
furiously.

"But I have heard that the crocuses promise well," continued my
companion imperturbably.

"Ha! You put me off, do you?" said our new visitor, taking a step
forward and shaking his hunting-crop. "I know you, you scoundrel!
I have heard of you before. You are Holmes, the meddler."

My friend smiled.

"Holmes, the busybody!"

His smile broadened.

"Holmes, the Scotland Yard Jack-in-office!"

Holmes chuckled heartily. "Your conversation is most
entertaining," said he. "When you go out close the door, for
there is a decided draught."

"I will go when I have said my say. Don't you dare to meddle with
my affairs. I know that Miss Stoner has been here. I traced her!
I am a dangerous man to fall foul of! See here." He stepped
swiftly forward, seized the poker, and bent it into a curve with
his huge brown hands.

"See that you keep yourself out of my grip," he snarled, and
hurling the twisted poker into the fireplace he strode out of the
room.

"He seems a very amiable person," said Holmes, laughing. "I am
not quite so bulky, but if he had remained I might have shown him
that my grip was not much more feeble than his own." As he spoke
he picked up the steel poker and, with a sudden effort,
straightened it out again.

"Fancy his having the insolence to confound me with the official
detective force! This incident gives zest to our investigation,
however, and I only trust that our little friend will not suffer
from her imprudence in allowing this brute to trace her. And now,
Watson, we shall order breakfast, and afterwards I shall walk
down to Doctors' Commons, where I hope to get some data which may
help us in this matter."


It was nearly one o'clock when Sherlock Holmes returned from his
excursion. He held in his hand a sheet of blue paper, scrawled
over with notes and figures.

"I have seen the will of the deceased wife," said he. "To
determine its exact meaning I have been obliged to work out the
present prices of the investments with which it is concerned. The
total income, which at the time of the wife's death was little
short of 1100 pounds, is now, through the fall in agricultural
prices, not more than 750 pounds. Each daughter can claim an
income of 250 pounds, in case of marriage. It is evident,
therefore, that if both girls had married, this beauty would have
had a mere pittance, while even one of them would cripple him to
a very serious extent. My morning's work has not been wasted,
since it has proved that he has the very strongest motives for
standing in the way of anything of the sort. And now, Watson,
this is too serious for dawdling, especially as the old man is
aware that we are interesting ourselves in his affairs; so if you
are ready, we shall call a cab and drive to Waterloo. I should be
very much obliged if you would slip your revolver into your
pocket. An Eley's No. 2 is an excellent argument with gentlemen
who can twist steel pokers into knots. That and a tooth-brush
are, I think, all that we need."

At Waterloo we were fortunate in catching a train for
Leatherhead, where we hired a trap at the station inn and drove
for four or five miles through the lovely Surrey lanes. It was a
perfect day, with a bright sun and a few fleecy clouds in the
heavens. The trees and wayside hedges were just throwing out
their first green shoots, and the air was full of the pleasant
smell of the moist earth. To me at least there was a strange
contrast between the sweet promise of the spring and this
sinister quest upon which we were engaged. My companion sat in
the front of the trap, his arms folded, his hat pulled down over
his eyes, and his chin sunk upon his breast, buried in the
deepest thought. Suddenly, however, he started, tapped me on the
shoulder, and pointed over the meadows.

"Look there!" said he.

A heavily timbered park stretched up in a gentle slope,
thickening into a grove at the highest point. From amid the
branches there jutted out the grey gables and high roof-tree of a
very old mansion.

"Stoke Moran?" said he.

"Yes, sir, that be the house of Dr. Grimesby Roylott," remarked
the driver.

"There is some building going on there," said Holmes; "that is
where we are going."

"There's the village," said the driver, pointing to a cluster of
roofs some distance to the left; "but if you want to get to the
house, you'll find it shorter to get over this stile, and so by
the foot-path over the fields. There it is, where the lady is
walking."

"And the lady, I fancy, is Miss Stoner," observed Holmes, shading
his eyes. "Yes, I think we had better do as you suggest."

We got off, paid our fare, and the trap rattled back on its way
to Leatherhead.

"I thought it as well," said Holmes as we climbed the stile,
"that this fellow should think we had come here as architects, or
on some definite business. It may stop his gossip.
Good-afternoon, Miss Stoner. You see that we have been as good as
our word."

Our client of the morning had hurried forward to meet us with a
face which spoke her joy. "I have been waiting so eagerly for
you," she cried, shaking hands with us warmly. "All has turned
out splendidly. Dr. Roylott has gone to town, and it is unlikely
that he will be back before evening."

"We have had the pleasure of making the doctor's acquaintance,"
said Holmes, and in a few words he sketched out what had
occurred. Miss Stoner turned white to the lips as she listened.

"Good heavens!" she cried, "he has followed me, then."

"So it appears."

"He is so cunning that I never know when I am safe from him. What
will he say when he returns?"

"He must guard himself, for he may find that there is someone
more cunning than himself upon his track. You must lock yourself
up from him to-night. If he is violent, we shall take you away to
your aunt's at Harrow. Now, we must make the best use of our
time, so kindly take us at once to the rooms which we are to
examine."

The building was of grey, lichen-blotched stone, with a high
central portion and two curving wings, like the claws of a crab,
thrown out on each side. In one of these wings the windows were
broken and blocked with wooden boards, while the roof was partly
caved in, a picture of ruin. The central portion was in little
better repair, but the right-hand block was comparatively modern,
and the blinds in the windows, with the blue smoke curling up
from the chimneys, showed that this was where the family resided.
Some scaffolding had been erected against the end wall, and the
stone-work had been broken into, but there were no signs of any
workmen at the moment of our visit. Holmes walked slowly up and
down the ill-trimmed lawn and examined with deep attention the
outsides of the windows.

"This, I take it, belongs to the room in which you used to sleep,
the centre one to your sister's, and the one next to the main
building to Dr. Roylott's chamber?"

"Exactly so. But I am now sleeping in the middle one."

"Pending the alterations, as I understand. By the way, there does
not seem to be any very pressing need for repairs at that end
wall."

"There were none. I believe that it was an excuse to move me from
my room."

"Ah! that is suggestive. Now, on the other side of this narrow
wing runs the corridor from which these three rooms open. There
are windows in it, of course?"

"Yes, but very small ones. Too narrow for anyone to pass
through."

"As you both locked your doors at night, your rooms were
unapproachable from that side. Now, would you have the kindness
to go into your room and bar your shutters?"

Miss Stoner did so, and Holmes, after a careful examination
through the open window, endeavoured in every way to force the
shutter open, but without success. There was no slit through
which a knife could be passed to raise the bar. Then with his
lens he tested the hinges, but they were of solid iron, built
firmly into the massive masonry. "Hum!" said he, scratching his
chin in some perplexity, "my theory certainly presents some
difficulties. No one could pass these shutters if they were
bolted. Well, we shall see if the inside throws any light upon
the matter."

A small side door led into the whitewashed corridor from which
the three bedrooms opened. Holmes refused to examine the third
chamber, so we passed at once to the second, that in which Miss
Stoner was now sleeping, and in which her sister had met with her
fate. It was a homely little room, with a low ceiling and a
gaping fireplace, after the fashion of old country-houses. A
brown chest of drawers stood in one corner, a narrow
white-counterpaned bed in another, and a dressing-table on the
left-hand side of the window. These articles, with two small
wicker-work chairs, made up all the furniture in the room save
for a square of Wilton carpet in the centre. The boards round and
the panelling of the walls were of brown, worm-eaten oak, so old
and discoloured that it may have dated from the original building
of the house. Holmes drew one of the chairs into a corner and sat
silent, while his eyes travelled round and round and up and down,
taking in every detail of the apartment.

"Where does that bell communicate with?" he asked at last
pointing to a thick bell-rope which hung down beside the bed, the
tassel actually lying upon the pillow.

"It goes to the housekeeper's room."

"It looks newer than the other things?"

"Yes, it was only put there a couple of years ago."

"Your sister asked for it, I suppose?"

"No, I never heard of her using it. We used always to get what we
wanted for ourselves."

"Indeed, it seemed unnecessary to put so nice a bell-pull there.
You will excuse me for a few minutes while I satisfy myself as to
this floor." He threw himself down upon his face with his lens in
his hand and crawled swiftly backward and forward, examining
minutely the cracks between the boards. Then he did the same with
the wood-work with which the chamber was panelled. Finally he
walked over to the bed and spent some time in staring at it and
in running his eye up and down the wall. Finally he took the
bell-rope in his hand and gave it a brisk tug.

"Why, it's a dummy," said he.

"Won't it ring?"

"No, it is not even attached to a wire. This is very interesting.
You can see now that it is fastened to a hook just above where
the little opening for the ventilator is."

"How very absurd! I never noticed that before."

"Very strange!" muttered Holmes, pulling at the rope. "There are
one or two very singular points about this room. For example,
what a fool a builder must be to open a ventilator into another
room, when, with the same trouble, he might have communicated
with the outside air!"

"That is also quite modern," said the lady.

"Done about the same time as the bell-rope?" remarked Holmes.

"Yes, there were several little changes carried out about that
time."

"They seem to have been of a most interesting character--dummy
bell-ropes, and ventilators which do not ventilate. With your
permission, Miss Stoner, we shall now carry our researches into
the inner apartment."

Dr. Grimesby Roylott's chamber was larger than that of his
step-daughter, but was as plainly furnished. A camp-bed, a small
wooden shelf full of books, mostly of a technical character, an
armchair beside the bed, a plain wooden chair against the wall, a
round table, and a large iron safe were the principal things
which met the eye. Holmes walked slowly round and examined each
and all of them with the keenest interest.

"What's in here?" he asked, tapping the safe.

"My stepfather's business papers."

"Oh! you have seen inside, then?"

"Only once, some years ago. I remember that it was full of
papers."

"There isn't a cat in it, for example?"

"No. What a strange idea!"

"Well, look at this!" He took up a small saucer of milk which
stood on the top of it.

"No; we don't keep a cat. But there is a cheetah and a baboon."

"Ah, yes, of course! Well, a cheetah is just a big cat, and yet a
saucer of milk does not go very far in satisfying its wants, I
daresay. There is one point which I should wish to determine." He
squatted down in front of the wooden chair and examined the seat
of it with the greatest attention.

"Thank you. That is quite settled," said he, rising and putting
his lens in his pocket. "Hullo! Here is something interesting!"

The object which had caught his eye was a small dog lash hung on
one corner of the bed. The lash, however, was curled upon itself
and tied so as to make a loop of whipcord.

"What do you make of that, Watson?"

"It's a common enough lash. But I don't know why it should be
tied."

"That is not quite so common, is it? Ah, me! it's a wicked world,
and when a clever man turns his brains to crime it is the worst
of all. I think that I have seen enough now, Miss Stoner, and
with your permission we shall walk out upon the lawn."

I had never seen my friend's face so grim or his brow so dark as
it was when we turned from the scene of this investigation. We
had walked several times up and down the lawn, neither Miss
Stoner nor myself liking to break in upon his thoughts before he
roused himself from his reverie.

"It is very essential, Miss Stoner," said he, "that you should
absolutely follow my advice in every respect."

"I shall most certainly do so."

"The matter is too serious for any hesitation. Your life may
depend upon your compliance."

"I assure you that I am in your hands."

"In the first place, both my friend and I must spend the night in
your room."

Both Miss Stoner and I gazed at him in astonishment.

"Yes, it must be so. Let me explain. I believe that that is the
village inn over there?"

"Yes, that is the Crown."

"Very good. Your windows would be visible from there?"

"Certainly."

"You must confine yourself to your room, on pretence of a
headache, when your stepfather comes back. Then when you hear him
retire for the night, you must open the shutters of your window,
undo the hasp, put your lamp there as a signal to us, and then
withdraw quietly with everything which you are likely to want
into the room which you used to occupy. I have no doubt that, in
spite of the repairs, you could manage there for one night."

"Oh, yes, easily."

"The rest you will leave in our hands."

"But what will you do?"

"We shall spend the night in your room, and we shall investigate
the cause of this noise which has disturbed you."

"I believe, Mr. Holmes, that you have already made up your mind,"
said Miss Stoner, laying her hand upon my companion's sleeve.

"Perhaps I have."

"Then, for pity's sake, tell me what was the cause of my sister's
death."

"I should prefer to have clearer proofs before I speak."

"You can at least tell me whether my own thought is correct, and
if she died from some sudden fright."

"No, I do not think so. I think that there was probably some more
tangible cause. And now, Miss Stoner, we must leave you for if
Dr. Roylott returned and saw us our journey would be in vain.
Good-bye, and be brave, for if you will do what I have told you,
you may rest assured that we shall soon drive away the dangers
that threaten you."

Sherlock Holmes and I had no difficulty in engaging a bedroom and
sitting-room at the Crown Inn. They were on the upper floor, and
from our window we could command a view of the avenue gate, and
of the inhabited wing of Stoke Moran Manor House. At dusk we saw
Dr. Grimesby Roylott drive past, his huge form looming up beside
the little figure of the lad who drove him. The boy had some
slight difficulty in undoing the heavy iron gates, and we heard
the hoarse roar of the doctor's voice and saw the fury with which
he shook his clinched fists at him. The trap drove on, and a few
minutes later we saw a sudden light spring up among the trees as
the lamp was lit in one of the sitting-rooms.

"Do you know, Watson," said Holmes as we sat together in the
gathering darkness, "I have really some scruples as to taking you
to-night. There is a distinct element of danger."

"Can I be of assistance?"

"Your presence might be invaluable."

"Then I shall certainly come."

"It is very kind of you."

"You speak of danger. You have evidently seen more in these rooms
than was visible to me."

"No, but I fancy that I may have deduced a little more. I imagine
that you saw all that I did."

"I saw nothing remarkable save the bell-rope, and what purpose
that could answer I confess is more than I can imagine."

"You saw the ventilator, too?"

"Yes, but I do not think that it is such a very unusual thing to
have a small opening between two rooms. It was so small that a
rat could hardly pass through."

"I knew that we should find a ventilator before ever we came to
Stoke Moran."

"My dear Holmes!"

"Oh, yes, I did. You remember in her statement she said that her
sister could smell Dr. Roylott's cigar. Now, of course that
suggested at once that there must be a communication between the
two rooms. It could only be a small one, or it would have been
remarked upon at the coroner's inquiry. I deduced a ventilator."

"But what harm can there be in that?"

"Well, there is at least a curious coincidence of dates. A
ventilator is made, a cord is hung, and a lady who sleeps in the
bed dies. Does not that strike you?"

"I cannot as yet see any connection."

"Did you observe anything very peculiar about that bed?"

"No."

"It was clamped to the floor. Did you ever see a bed fastened
like that before?"

"I cannot say that I have."

"The lady could not move her bed. It must always be in the same
relative position to the ventilator and to the rope--or so we may
call it, since it was clearly never meant for a bell-pull."

"Holmes," I cried, "I seem to see dimly what you are hinting at.
We are only just in time to prevent some subtle and horrible
crime."

"Subtle enough and horrible enough. When a doctor does go wrong
he is the first of criminals. He has nerve and he has knowledge.
Palmer and Pritchard were among the heads of their profession.
This man strikes even deeper, but I think, Watson, that we shall
be able to strike deeper still. But we shall have horrors enough
before the night is over; for goodness' sake let us have a quiet
pipe and turn our minds for a few hours to something more
cheerful."


About nine o'clock the light among the trees was extinguished,
and all was dark in the direction of the Manor House. Two hours
passed slowly away, and then, suddenly, just at the stroke of
eleven, a single bright light shone out right in front of us.

"That is our signal," said Holmes, springing to his feet; "it
comes from the middle window."

As we passed out he exchanged a few words with the landlord,
explaining that we were going on a late visit to an acquaintance,
and that it was possible that we might spend the night there. A
moment later we were out on the dark road, a chill wind blowing
in our faces, and one yellow light twinkling in front of us
through the gloom to guide us on our sombre errand.

There was little difficulty in entering the grounds, for
unrepaired breaches gaped in the old park wall. Making our way
among the trees, we reached the lawn, crossed it, and were about
to enter through the window when out from a clump of laurel
bushes there darted what seemed to be a hideous and distorted
child, who threw itself upon the grass with writhing limbs and
then ran swiftly across the lawn into the darkness.

"My God!" I whispered; "did you see it?"

Holmes was for the moment as startled as I. His hand closed like
a vice upon my wrist in his agitation. Then he broke into a low
laugh and put his lips to my ear.

"It is a nice household," he murmured. "That is the baboon."

I had forgotten the strange pets which the doctor affected. There
was a cheetah, too; perhaps we might find it upon our shoulders
at any moment. I confess that I felt easier in my mind when,
after following Holmes' example and slipping off my shoes, I
found myself inside the bedroom. My companion noiselessly closed
the shutters, moved the lamp onto the table, and cast his eyes
round the room. All was as we had seen it in the daytime. Then
creeping up to me and making a trumpet of his hand, he whispered
into my ear again so gently that it was all that I could do to
distinguish the words:

"The least sound would be fatal to our plans."

I nodded to show that I had heard.

"We must sit without light. He would see it through the
ventilator."

I nodded again.

"Do not go asleep; your very life may depend upon it. Have your
pistol ready in case we should need it. I will sit on the side of
the bed, and you in that chair."

I took out my revolver and laid it on the corner of the table.

Holmes had brought up a long thin cane, and this he placed upon
the bed beside him. By it he laid the box of matches and the
stump of a candle. Then he turned down the lamp, and we were left
in darkness.

How shall I ever forget that dreadful vigil? I could not hear a
sound, not even the drawing of a breath, and yet I knew that my
companion sat open-eyed, within a few feet of me, in the same
state of nervous tension in which I was myself. The shutters cut
off the least ray of light, and we waited in absolute darkness.

From outside came the occasional cry of a night-bird, and once at
our very window a long drawn catlike whine, which told us that
the cheetah was indeed at liberty. Far away we could hear the
deep tones of the parish clock, which boomed out every quarter of
an hour. How long they seemed, those quarters! Twelve struck, and
one and two and three, and still we sat waiting silently for
whatever might befall.

Suddenly there was the momentary gleam of a light up in the
direction of the ventilator, which vanished immediately, but was
succeeded by a strong smell of burning oil and heated metal.
Someone in the next room had lit a dark-lantern. I heard a gentle
sound of movement, and then all was silent once more, though the
smell grew stronger. For half an hour I sat with straining ears.
Then suddenly another sound became audible--a very gentle,
soothing sound, like that of a small jet of steam escaping
continually from a kettle. The instant that we heard it, Holmes
sprang from the bed, struck a match, and lashed furiously with
his cane at the bell-pull.

"You see it, Watson?" he yelled. "You see it?"

But I saw nothing. At the moment when Holmes struck the light I
heard a low, clear whistle, but the sudden glare flashing into my
weary eyes made it impossible for me to tell what it was at which
my friend lashed so savagely. I could, however, see that his face
was deadly pale and filled with horror and loathing. He had
ceased to strike and was gazing up at the ventilator when
suddenly there broke from the silence of the night the most
horrible cry to which I have ever listened. It swelled up louder
and louder, a hoarse yell of pain and fear and anger all mingled
in the one dreadful shriek. They say that away down in the
village, and even in the distant parsonage, that cry raised the
sleepers from their beds. It struck cold to our hearts, and I
stood gazing at Holmes, and he at me, until the last echoes of it
had died away into the silence from which it rose.

"What can it mean?" I gasped.

"It means that it is all over," Holmes answered. "And perhaps,
after all, it is for the best. Take your pistol, and we will
enter Dr. Roylott's room."

With a grave face he lit the lamp and led the way down the
corridor. Twice he struck at the chamber door without any reply
from within. Then he turned the handle and entered, I at his
heels, with the cocked pistol in my hand.

It was a singular sight which met our eyes. On the table stood a
dark-lantern with the shutter half open, throwing a brilliant
beam of light upon the iron safe, the door of which was ajar.
Beside this table, on the wooden chair, sat Dr. Grimesby Roylott
clad in a long grey dressing-gown, his bare ankles protruding
beneath, and his feet thrust into red heelless Turkish slippers.
Across his lap lay the short stock with the long lash which we
had noticed during the day. His chin was cocked upward and his
eyes were fixed in a dreadful, rigid stare at the corner of the
ceiling. Round his brow he had a peculiar yellow band, with
brownish speckles, which seemed to be bound tightly round his
head. As we entered he made neither sound nor motion.

"The band! the speckled band!" whispered Holmes.

I took a step forward. In an instant his strange headgear began
to move, and there reared itself from among his hair the squat
diamond-shaped head and puffed neck of a loathsome serpent.

"It is a swamp adder!" cried Holmes; "the deadliest snake in
India. He has died within ten seconds of being bitten. Violence
does, in truth, recoil upon the violent, and the schemer falls
into the pit which he digs for another. Let us thrust this
creature back into its den, and we can then remove Miss Stoner to
some place of shelter and let the county police know what has
happened."

As he spoke he drew the dog-whip swiftly from the dead man's lap,
and throwing the noose round the reptile's neck he drew it from
its horrid perch and, carrying it at arm's length, threw it into
the iron safe, which he closed upon it.

Such are the true facts of the death of Dr. Grimesby Roylott, of
Stoke Moran. It is not necessary that I should prolong a
narrative which has already run to too great a length by telling
how we broke the sad news to the terrified girl, how we conveyed
her by the morning train to the care of her good aunt at Harrow,
of how the slow process of official inquiry came to the
conclusion that the doctor met his fate while indiscreetly
playing with a dangerous pet. The little which I had yet to learn
of the case was told me by Sherlock Holmes as we travelled back
next day.

"I had," said he, "come to an entirely erroneous conclusion which
shows, my dear Watson, how dangerous it always is to reason from
insufficient data. The presence of the gipsies, and the use of
the word 'band,' which was used by the poor girl, no doubt, to
explain the appearance which she had caught a hurried glimpse of
by the light of her match, were sufficient to put me upon an
entirely wrong scent. I can only claim the merit that I instantly
reconsidered my position when, however, it became clear to me
that whatever danger threatened an occupant of the room could not
come either from the window or the door. My attention was
speedily drawn, as I have already remarked to you, to this
ventilator, and to the bell-rope which hung down to the bed. The
discovery that this was a dummy, and that the bed was clamped to
the floor, instantly gave rise to the suspicion that the rope was
there as a bridge for something passing through the hole and
coming to the bed. The idea of a snake instantly occurred to me,
and when I coupled it with my knowledge that the doctor was
furnished with a supply of creatures from India, I felt that I
was probably on the right track. The idea of using a form of
poison which could not possibly be discovered by any chemical
test was just such a one as would occur to a clever and ruthless
man who had had an Eastern training. The rapidity with which such
a poison would take effect would also, from his point of view, be
an advantage. It would be a sharp-eyed coroner, indeed, who could
distinguish the two little dark punctures which would show where
the poison fangs had done their work. Then I thought of the
whistle. Of course he must recall the snake before the morning
light revealed it to the victim. He had trained it, probably by
the use of the milk which we saw, to return to him when summoned.
He would put it through this ventilator at the hour that he
thought best, with the certainty that it would crawl down the
rope and land on the bed. It might or might not bite the
occupant, perhaps she might escape every night for a week, but
sooner or later she must fall a victim.

"I had come to these conclusions before ever I had entered his
room. An inspection of his chair showed me that he had been in
the habit of standing on it, which of course would be necessary
in order that he should reach the ventilator. The sight of the
safe, the saucer of milk, and the loop of whipcord were enough to
finally dispel any doubts which may have remained. The metallic
clang heard by Miss Stoner was obviously caused by her stepfather
hastily closing the door of his safe upon its terrible occupant.
Having once made up my mind, you know the steps which I took in
order to put the matter to the proof. I heard the creature hiss
as I have no doubt that you did also, and I instantly lit the
light and attacked it."

"With the result of driving it through the ventilator."

"And also with the result of causing it to turn upon its master
at the other side. Some of the blows of my cane came home and
roused its snakish temper, so that it flew upon the first person
it saw. In this way I am no doubt indirectly responsible for Dr.
Grimesby Roylott's death, and I cannot say that it is likely to
weigh very heavily upon my conscience."



IX. THE ADVENTURE OF THE ENGINEER'S THUMB

Of all the problems which have been submitted to my friend, Mr.
Sherlock Holmes, for solution during the years of our intimacy,
there were only two which I was the means of introducing to his
notice--that of Mr. Hatherley's thumb, and that of Colonel
Warburton's madness. Of these the latter may have afforded a
finer field for an acute and original observer, but the other was
so strange in its inception and so dramatic in its details that
it may be the more worthy of being placed upon record, even if it
gave my friend fewer openings for those deductive methods of
reasoning by which he achieved such remarkable results. The story
has, I believe, been told more than once in the newspapers, but,
like all such narratives, its effect is much less striking when
set forth en bloc in a single half-column of print than when the
facts slowly evolve before your own eyes, and the mystery clears
gradually away as each new discovery furnishes a step which leads
on to the complete truth. At the time the circumstances made a
deep impression upon me, and the lapse of two years has hardly
served to weaken the effect.

It was in the summer of '89, not long after my marriage, that the
events occurred which I am now about to summarise. I had returned
to civil practice and had finally abandoned Holmes in his Baker
Street rooms, although I continually visited him and occasionally
even persuaded him to forgo his Bohemian habits so far as to come
and visit us. My practice had steadily increased, and as I
happened to live at no very great distance from Paddington
Station, I got a few patients from among the officials. One of
these, whom I had cured of a painful and lingering disease, was
never weary of advertising my virtues and of endeavouring to send
me on every sufferer over whom he might have any influence.

One morning, at a little before seven o'clock, I was awakened by
the maid tapping at the door to announce that two men had come
from Paddington and were waiting in the consulting-room. I
dressed hurriedly, for I knew by experience that railway cases
were seldom trivial, and hastened downstairs. As I descended, my
old ally, the guard, came out of the room and closed the door
tightly behind him.

"I've got him here," he whispered, jerking his thumb over his
shoulder; "he's all right."

"What is it, then?" I asked, for his manner suggested that it was
some strange creature which he had caged up in my room.

"It's a new patient," he whispered. "I thought I'd bring him
round myself; then he couldn't slip away. There he is, all safe
and sound. I must go now, Doctor; I have my dooties, just the
same as you." And off he went, this trusty tout, without even
giving me time to thank him.

I entered my consulting-room and found a gentleman seated by the
table. He was quietly dressed in a suit of heather tweed with a
soft cloth cap which he had laid down upon my books. Round one of
his hands he had a handkerchief wrapped, which was mottled all
over with bloodstains. He was young, not more than
five-and-twenty, I should say, with a strong, masculine face; but
he was exceedingly pale and gave me the impression of a man who
was suffering from some strong agitation, which it took all his
strength of mind to control.

"I am sorry to knock you up so early, Doctor," said he, "but I
have had a very serious accident during the night. I came in by
train this morning, and on inquiring at Paddington as to where I
might find a doctor, a worthy fellow very kindly escorted me
here. I gave the maid a card, but I see that she has left it upon
the side-table."

I took it up and glanced at it. "Mr. Victor Hatherley, hydraulic
engineer, 16A, Victoria Street (3rd floor)." That was the name,
style, and abode of my morning visitor. "I regret that I have
kept you waiting," said I, sitting down in my library-chair. "You
are fresh from a night journey, I understand, which is in itself
a monotonous occupation."

"Oh, my night could not be called monotonous," said he, and
laughed. He laughed very heartily, with a high, ringing note,
leaning back in his chair and shaking his sides. All my medical
instincts rose up against that laugh.

"Stop it!" I cried; "pull yourself together!" and I poured out
some water from a caraffe.

It was useless, however. He was off in one of those hysterical
outbursts which come upon a strong nature when some great crisis
is over and gone. Presently he came to himself once more, very
weary and pale-looking.

"I have been making a fool of myself," he gasped.

"Not at all. Drink this." I dashed some brandy into the water,
and the colour began to come back to his bloodless cheeks.
 

 General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
<END-OF-CORPUS>


;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;
; 
; Opinion Lexicon: Negative
;
; This file contains a list of NEGATIVE opinion words (or sentiment words).
;
; This file and the papers can all be downloaded from 
;    http://www.cs.uic.edu/~liub/FBS/sentiment-analysis.html
;
; If you use this list, please cite one of the following two papers:
;
;   Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. "Mining and Summarizing Customer Reviews." 
;       Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge 
;       Discovery and Data Mining (KDD-2004), Aug 22-25, 2004, Seattle, 
;       Washington, USA, 
;   Bing Liu, Minqing Hu and Junsheng Cheng. "Opinion Observer: Analyzing 
;       and Comparing Opinions on the Web." Proceedings of the 14th 
;       International World Wide Web conference (WWW-2005), May 10-14, 
;       2005, Chiba, Japan.
;
; Notes: 
;    1. The appearance of an opinion word in a sentence does not necessarily  
;       mean that the sentence expresses a positive or negative opinion. 
;       See the paper below:
;
;       Bing Liu. "Sentiment Analysis and Subjectivity." An chapter in 
;          Handbook of Natural Language Processing, Second Edition, 
;          (editors: N. Indurkhya and F. J. Damerau), 2010.
;
;    2. You will notice many misspelled words in the list. They are not 
;       mistakes. They are included as these misspelled words appear 
;       frequently in social media content. 
;
;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;

2-faced
2-faces
abnormal
abolish
abominable
abominably
abominate
abomination
abort
aborted
aborts
abrade
abrasive
abrupt
abruptly
abscond
absence
absent-minded
absentee
absurd
absurdity
absurdly
absurdness
abuse
abused
abuses
abusive
abysmal
abysmally
abyss
accidental
accost
accursed
accusation
accusations
accuse
accuses
accusing
accusingly
acerbate
acerbic
acerbically
ache
ached
aches
achey
aching
acrid
acridly
acridness
acrimonious
acrimoniously
acrimony
adamant
adamantly
addict
addicted
addicting
addicts
admonish
admonisher
admonishingly
admonishment
admonition
adulterate
adulterated
adulteration
adulterier
adversarial
adversary
adverse
adversity
afflict
affliction
afflictive
affront
afraid
aggravate
aggravating
aggravation
aggression
aggressive
aggressiveness
aggressor
aggrieve
aggrieved
aggrivation
aghast
agonies
agonize
agonizing
agonizingly
agony
aground
ail
ailing
ailment
aimless
alarm
alarmed
alarming
alarmingly
alienate
alienated
alienation
allegation
allegations
allege
allergic
allergies
allergy
aloof
altercation
ambiguity
ambiguous
ambivalence
ambivalent
ambush
amiss
amputate
anarchism
anarchist
anarchistic
anarchy
anemic
anger
angrily
angriness
angry
anguish
animosity
annihilate
annihilation
annoy
annoyance
annoyances
annoyed
annoying
annoyingly
annoys
anomalous
anomaly
antagonism
antagonist
antagonistic
antagonize
anti-
anti-american
anti-israeli
anti-occupation
anti-proliferation
anti-semites
anti-social
anti-us
anti-white
antipathy
antiquated
antithetical
anxieties
anxiety
anxious
anxiously
anxiousness
apathetic
apathetically
apathy
apocalypse
apocalyptic
apologist
apologists
appal
appall
appalled
appalling
appallingly
apprehension
apprehensions
apprehensive
apprehensively
arbitrary
arcane
archaic
arduous
arduously
argumentative
arrogance
arrogant
arrogantly
ashamed
asinine
asininely
asinininity
askance
asperse
aspersion
aspersions
assail
assassin
assassinate
assault
assult
astray
asunder
atrocious
atrocities
atrocity
atrophy
attack
attacks
audacious
audaciously
audaciousness
audacity
audiciously
austere
authoritarian
autocrat
autocratic
avalanche
avarice
avaricious
avariciously
avenge
averse
aversion
aweful
awful
awfully
awfulness
awkward
awkwardness
ax
babble
back-logged
back-wood
back-woods
backache
backaches
backaching
backbite
backbiting
backward
backwardness
backwood
backwoods
bad
badly
baffle
baffled
bafflement
baffling
bait
balk
banal
banalize
bane
banish
banishment
bankrupt
barbarian
barbaric
barbarically
barbarity
barbarous
barbarously
barren
baseless
bash
bashed
bashful
bashing
bastard
bastards
battered
battering
batty
bearish
beastly
bedlam
bedlamite
befoul
beg
beggar
beggarly
begging
beguile
belabor
belated
beleaguer
belie
belittle
belittled
belittling
bellicose
belligerence
belligerent
belligerently
bemoan
bemoaning
bemused
bent
berate
bereave
bereavement
bereft
berserk
beseech
beset
besiege
besmirch
bestial
betray
betrayal
betrayals
betrayer
betraying
betrays
bewail
beware
bewilder
bewildered
bewildering
bewilderingly
bewilderment
bewitch
bias
biased
biases
bicker
bickering
bid-rigging
bigotries
bigotry
bitch
bitchy
biting
bitingly
bitter
bitterly
bitterness
bizarre
blab
blabber
blackmail
blah
blame
blameworthy
bland
blandish
blaspheme
blasphemous
blasphemy
blasted
blatant
blatantly
blather
bleak
bleakly
bleakness
bleed
bleeding
bleeds
blemish
blind
blinding
blindingly
blindside
blister
blistering
bloated
blockage
blockhead
bloodshed
bloodthirsty
bloody
blotchy
blow
blunder
blundering
blunders
blunt
blur
bluring
blurred
blurring
blurry
blurs
blurt
boastful
boggle
bogus
boil
boiling
boisterous
bomb
bombard
bombardment
bombastic
bondage
bonkers
bore
bored
boredom
bores
boring
botch
bother
bothered
bothering
bothers
bothersome
bowdlerize
boycott
braggart
bragger
brainless
brainwash
brash
brashly
brashness
brat
bravado
brazen
brazenly
brazenness
breach
break
break-up
break-ups
breakdown
breaking
breaks
breakup
breakups
bribery
brimstone
bristle
brittle
broke
broken
broken-hearted
brood
browbeat
bruise
bruised
bruises
bruising
brusque
brutal
brutalising
brutalities
brutality
brutalize
brutalizing
brutally
brute
brutish
bs
buckle
bug
bugging
buggy
bugs
bulkier
bulkiness
bulky
bulkyness
bull****
bull----
bullies
bullshit
bullshyt
bully
bullying
bullyingly
bum
bump
bumped
bumping
bumpping
bumps
bumpy
bungle
bungler
bungling
bunk
burden
burdensome
burdensomely
burn
burned
burning
burns
bust
busts
busybody
butcher
butchery
buzzing
byzantine
cackle
calamities
calamitous
calamitously
calamity
callous
calumniate
calumniation
calumnies
calumnious
calumniously
calumny
cancer
cancerous
cannibal
cannibalize
capitulate
capricious
capriciously
capriciousness
capsize
careless
carelessness
caricature
carnage
carp
cartoonish
cash-strapped
castigate
castrated
casualty
cataclysm
cataclysmal
cataclysmic
cataclysmically
catastrophe
catastrophes
catastrophic
catastrophically
catastrophies
caustic
caustically
cautionary
cave
censure
chafe
chaff
chagrin
challenging
chaos
chaotic
chasten
chastise
chastisement
chatter
chatterbox
cheap
cheapen
cheaply
cheat
cheated
cheater
cheating
cheats
checkered
cheerless
cheesy
chide
childish
chill
chilly
chintzy
choke
choleric
choppy
chore
chronic
chunky
clamor
clamorous
clash
cliche
cliched
clique
clog
clogged
clogs
cloud
clouding
cloudy
clueless
clumsy
clunky
coarse
cocky
coerce
coercion
coercive
cold
coldly
collapse
collude
collusion
combative
combust
comical
commiserate
commonplace
commotion
commotions
complacent
complain
complained
complaining
complains
complaint
complaints
complex
complicated
complication
complicit
compulsion
compulsive
concede
conceded
conceit
conceited
concen
concens
concern
concerned
concerns
concession
concessions
condemn
condemnable
condemnation
condemned
condemns
condescend
condescending
condescendingly
condescension
confess
confession
confessions
confined
conflict
conflicted
conflicting
conflicts
confound
confounded
confounding
confront
confrontation
confrontational
confuse
confused
confuses
confusing
confusion
confusions
congested
congestion
cons
conscons
conservative
conspicuous
conspicuously
conspiracies
conspiracy
conspirator
conspiratorial
conspire
consternation
contagious
contaminate
contaminated
contaminates
contaminating
contamination
contempt
contemptible
contemptuous
contemptuously
contend
contention
contentious
contort
contortions
contradict
contradiction
contradictory
contrariness
contravene
contrive
contrived
controversial
controversy
convoluted
corrode
corrosion
corrosions
corrosive
corrupt
corrupted
corrupting
corruption
corrupts
corruptted
costlier
costly
counter-productive
counterproductive
coupists
covetous
coward
cowardly
crabby
crack
cracked
cracks
craftily
craftly
crafty
cramp
cramped
cramping
cranky
crap
crappy
craps
crash
crashed
crashes
crashing
crass
craven
cravenly
craze
crazily
craziness
crazy
creak
creaking
creaks
credulous
creep
creeping
creeps
creepy
crept
crime
criminal
cringe
cringed
cringes
cripple
crippled
cripples
crippling
crisis
critic
critical
criticism
criticisms
criticize
criticized
criticizing
critics
cronyism
crook
crooked
crooks
crowded
crowdedness
crude
cruel
crueler
cruelest
cruelly
cruelness
cruelties
cruelty
crumble
crumbling
crummy
crumple
crumpled
crumples
crush
crushed
crushing
cry
culpable
culprit
cumbersome
cunt
cunts
cuplrit
curse
cursed
curses
curt
cuss
cussed
cutthroat
cynical
cynicism
d*mn
damage
damaged
damages
damaging
damn
damnable
damnably
damnation
damned
damning
damper
danger
dangerous
dangerousness
dark
darken
darkened
darker
darkness
dastard
dastardly
daunt
daunting
dauntingly
dawdle
daze
dazed
dead
deadbeat
deadlock
deadly
deadweight
deaf
dearth
death
debacle
debase
debasement
debaser
debatable
debauch
debaucher
debauchery
debilitate
debilitating
debility
debt
debts
decadence
decadent
decay
decayed
deceit
deceitful
deceitfully
deceitfulness
deceive
deceiver
deceivers
deceiving
deception
deceptive
deceptively
declaim
decline
declines
declining
decrement
decrepit
decrepitude
decry
defamation
defamations
defamatory
defame
defect
defective
defects
defensive
defiance
defiant
defiantly
deficiencies
deficiency
deficient
defile
defiler
deform
deformed
defrauding
defunct
defy
degenerate
degenerately
degeneration
degradation
degrade
degrading
degradingly
dehumanization
dehumanize
deign
deject
dejected
dejectedly
dejection
delay
delayed
delaying
delays
delinquency
delinquent
delirious
delirium
delude
deluded
deluge
delusion
delusional
delusions
demean
demeaning
demise
demolish
demolisher
demon
demonic
demonize
demonized
demonizes
demonizing
demoralize
demoralizing
demoralizingly
denial
denied
denies
denigrate
denounce
dense
dent
dented
dents
denunciate
denunciation
denunciations
deny
denying
deplete
deplorable
deplorably
deplore
deploring
deploringly
deprave
depraved
depravedly
deprecate
depress
depressed
depressing
depressingly
depression
depressions
deprive
deprived
deride
derision
derisive
derisively
derisiveness
derogatory
desecrate
desert
desertion
desiccate
desiccated
desititute
desolate
desolately
desolation
despair
despairing
despairingly
desperate
desperately
desperation
despicable
despicably
despise
despised
despoil
despoiler
despondence
despondency
despondent
despondently
despot
despotic
despotism
destabilisation
destains
destitute
destitution
destroy
destroyer
destruction
destructive
desultory
deter
deteriorate
deteriorating
deterioration
deterrent
detest
detestable
detestably
detested
detesting
detests
detract
detracted
detracting
detraction
detracts
detriment
detrimental
devastate
devastated
devastates
devastating
devastatingly
devastation
deviate
deviation
devil
devilish
devilishly
devilment
devilry
devious
deviously
deviousness
devoid
diabolic
diabolical
diabolically
diametrically
diappointed
diatribe
diatribes
dick
dictator
dictatorial
die
die-hard
died
dies
difficult
difficulties
difficulty
diffidence
dilapidated
dilemma
dilly-dally
dim
dimmer
din
ding
dings
dinky
dire
direly
direness
dirt
dirtbag
dirtbags
dirts
dirty
disable
disabled
disaccord
disadvantage
disadvantaged
disadvantageous
disadvantages
disaffect
disaffected
disaffirm
disagree
disagreeable
disagreeably
disagreed
disagreeing
disagreement
disagrees
disallow
disapointed
disapointing
disapointment
disappoint
disappointed
disappointing
disappointingly
disappointment
disappointments
disappoints
disapprobation
disapproval
disapprove
disapproving
disarm
disarray
disaster
disasterous
disastrous
disastrously
disavow
disavowal
disbelief
disbelieve
disbeliever
disclaim
discombobulate
discomfit
discomfititure
discomfort
discompose
disconcert
disconcerted
disconcerting
disconcertingly
disconsolate
disconsolately
disconsolation
discontent
discontented
discontentedly
discontinued
discontinuity
discontinuous
discord
discordance
discordant
discountenance
discourage
discouragement
discouraging
discouragingly
discourteous
discourteously
discoutinous
discredit
discrepant
discriminate
discrimination
discriminatory
disdain
disdained
disdainful
disdainfully
disfavor
disgrace
disgraced
disgraceful
disgracefully
disgruntle
disgruntled
disgust
disgusted
disgustedly
disgustful
disgustfully
disgusting
disgustingly
dishearten
disheartening
dishearteningly
dishonest
dishonestly
dishonesty
dishonor
dishonorable
dishonorablely
disillusion
disillusioned
disillusionment
disillusions
disinclination
disinclined
disingenuous
disingenuously
disintegrate
disintegrated
disintegrates
disintegration
disinterest
disinterested
dislike
disliked
dislikes
disliking
dislocated
disloyal
disloyalty
dismal
dismally
dismalness
dismay
dismayed
dismaying
dismayingly
dismissive
dismissively
disobedience
disobedient
disobey
disoobedient
disorder
disordered
disorderly
disorganized
disorient
disoriented
disown
disparage
disparaging
disparagingly
dispensable
dispirit
dispirited
dispiritedly
dispiriting
displace
displaced
displease
displeased
displeasing
displeasure
disproportionate
disprove
disputable
dispute
disputed
disquiet
disquieting
disquietingly
disquietude
disregard
disregardful
disreputable
disrepute
disrespect
disrespectable
disrespectablity
disrespectful
disrespectfully
disrespectfulness
disrespecting
disrupt
disruption
disruptive
diss
dissapointed
dissappointed
dissappointing
dissatisfaction
dissatisfactory
dissatisfied
dissatisfies
dissatisfy
dissatisfying
dissed
dissemble
dissembler
dissension
dissent
dissenter
dissention
disservice
disses
dissidence
dissident
dissidents
dissing
dissocial
dissolute
dissolution
dissonance
dissonant
dissonantly
dissuade
dissuasive
distains
distaste
distasteful
distastefully
distort
distorted
distortion
distorts
distract
distracting
distraction
distraught
distraughtly
distraughtness
distress
distressed
distressing
distressingly
distrust
distrustful
distrusting
disturb
disturbance
disturbed
disturbing
disturbingly
disunity
disvalue
divergent
divisive
divisively
divisiveness
dizzing
dizzingly
dizzy
doddering
dodgey
dogged
doggedly
dogmatic
doldrums
domineer
domineering
donside
doom
doomed
doomsday
dope
doubt
doubtful
doubtfully
doubts
douchbag
douchebag
douchebags
downbeat
downcast
downer
downfall
downfallen
downgrade
downhearted
downheartedly
downhill
downside
downsides
downturn
downturns
drab
draconian
draconic
drag
dragged
dragging
dragoon
drags
drain
drained
draining
drains
drastic
drastically
drawback
drawbacks
dread
dreadful
dreadfully
dreadfulness
dreary
dripped
dripping
drippy
drips
drones
droop
droops
drop-out
drop-outs
dropout
dropouts
drought
drowning
drunk
drunkard
drunken
dubious
dubiously
dubitable
dud
dull
dullard
dumb
dumbfound
dump
dumped
dumping
dumps
dunce
dungeon
dungeons
dupe
dust
dusty
dwindling
dying
earsplitting
eccentric
eccentricity
effigy
effrontery
egocentric
egomania
egotism
egotistical
egotistically
egregious
egregiously
election-rigger
elimination
emaciated
emasculate
embarrass
embarrassing
embarrassingly
embarrassment
embattled
embroil
embroiled
embroilment
emergency
emphatic
emphatically
emptiness
encroach
encroachment
endanger
enemies
enemy
enervate
enfeeble
enflame
engulf
enjoin
enmity
enrage
enraged
enraging
enslave
entangle
entanglement
entrap
entrapment
envious
enviously
enviousness
epidemic
equivocal
erase
erode
erodes
erosion
err
errant
erratic
erratically
erroneous
erroneously
error
errors
eruptions
escapade
eschew
estranged
evade
evasion
evasive
evil
evildoer
evils
eviscerate
exacerbate
exagerate
exagerated
exagerates
exaggerate
exaggeration
exasperate
exasperated
exasperating
exasperatingly
exasperation
excessive
excessively
exclusion
excoriate
excruciating
excruciatingly
excuse
excuses
execrate
exhaust
exhausted
exhaustion
exhausts
exhorbitant
exhort
exile
exorbitant
exorbitantance
exorbitantly
expel
expensive
expire
expired
explode
exploit
exploitation
explosive
expropriate
expropriation
expulse
expunge
exterminate
extermination
extinguish
extort
extortion
extraneous
extravagance
extravagant
extravagantly
extremism
extremist
extremists
eyesore
f**k
fabricate
fabrication
facetious
facetiously
fail
failed
failing
fails
failure
failures
faint
fainthearted
faithless
fake
fall
fallacies
fallacious
fallaciously
fallaciousness
fallacy
fallen
falling
fallout
falls
false
falsehood
falsely
falsify
falter
faltered
famine
famished
fanatic
fanatical
fanatically
fanaticism
fanatics
fanciful
far-fetched
farce
farcical
farcical-yet-provocative
farcically
farfetched
fascism
fascist
fastidious
fastidiously
fastuous
fat
fat-cat
fat-cats
fatal
fatalistic
fatalistically
fatally
fatcat
fatcats
fateful
fatefully
fathomless
fatigue
fatigued
fatique
fatty
fatuity
fatuous
fatuously
fault
faults
faulty
fawningly
faze
fear
fearful
fearfully
fears
fearsome
feckless
feeble
feeblely
feebleminded
feign
feint
fell
felon
felonious
ferociously
ferocity
fetid
fever
feverish
fevers
fiasco
fib
fibber
fickle
fiction
fictional
fictitious
fidget
fidgety
fiend
fiendish
fierce
figurehead
filth
filthy
finagle
finicky
fissures
fist
flabbergast
flabbergasted
flagging
flagrant
flagrantly
flair
flairs
flak
flake
flakey
flakieness
flaking
flaky
flare
flares
flareup
flareups
flat-out
flaunt
flaw
flawed
flaws
flee
fleed
fleeing
fleer
flees
fleeting
flicering
flicker
flickering
flickers
flighty
flimflam
flimsy
flirt
flirty
floored
flounder
floundering
flout
fluster
foe
fool
fooled
foolhardy
foolish
foolishly
foolishness
forbid
forbidden
forbidding
forceful
foreboding
forebodingly
forfeit
forged
forgetful
forgetfully
forgetfulness
forlorn
forlornly
forsake
forsaken
forswear
foul
foully
foulness
fractious
fractiously
fracture
fragile
fragmented
frail
frantic
frantically
franticly
fraud
fraudulent
fraught
frazzle
frazzled
freak
freaking
freakish
freakishly
freaks
freeze
freezes
freezing
frenetic
frenetically
frenzied
frenzy
fret
fretful
frets
friction
frictions
fried
friggin
frigging
fright
frighten
frightening
frighteningly
frightful
frightfully
frigid
frost
frown
froze
frozen
fruitless
fruitlessly
frustrate
frustrated
frustrates
frustrating
frustratingly
frustration
frustrations
fuck
fucking
fudge
fugitive
full-blown
fulminate
fumble
fume
fumes
fundamentalism
funky
funnily
funny
furious
furiously
furor
fury
fuss
fussy
fustigate
fusty
futile
futilely
futility
fuzzy
gabble
gaff
gaffe
gainsay
gainsayer
gall
galling
gallingly
galls
gangster
gape
garbage
garish
gasp
gauche
gaudy
gawk
gawky
geezer
genocide
get-rich
ghastly
ghetto
ghosting
gibber
gibberish
gibe
giddy
gimmick
gimmicked
gimmicking
gimmicks
gimmicky
glare
glaringly
glib
glibly
glitch
glitches
gloatingly
gloom
gloomy
glower
glum
glut
gnawing
goad
goading
god-awful
goof
goofy
goon
gossip
graceless
gracelessly
graft
grainy
grapple
grate
grating
gravely
greasy
greed
greedy
grief
grievance
grievances
grieve
grieving
grievous
grievously
grim
grimace
grind
gripe
gripes
grisly
gritty
gross
grossly
grotesque
grouch
grouchy
groundless
grouse
growl
grudge
grudges
grudging
grudgingly
gruesome
gruesomely
gruff
grumble
grumpier
grumpiest
grumpily
grumpish
grumpy
guile
guilt
guiltily
guilty
gullible
gutless
gutter
hack
hacks
haggard
haggle
hairloss
halfhearted
halfheartedly
hallucinate
hallucination
hamper
hampered
handicapped
hang
hangs
haphazard
hapless
harangue
harass
harassed
harasses
harassment
harboring
harbors
hard
hard-hit
hard-line
hard-liner
hardball
harden
hardened
hardheaded
hardhearted
hardliner
hardliners
hardship
hardships
harm
harmed
harmful
harms
harpy
harridan
harried
harrow
harsh
harshly
hasseling
hassle
hassled
hassles
haste
hastily
hasty
hate
hated
hateful
hatefully
hatefulness
hater
haters
hates
hating
hatred
haughtily
haughty
haunt
haunting
havoc
hawkish
haywire
hazard
hazardous
haze
hazy
head-aches
headache
headaches
heartbreaker
heartbreaking
heartbreakingly
heartless
heathen
heavy-handed
heavyhearted
heck
heckle
heckled
heckles
hectic
hedge
hedonistic
heedless
hefty
hegemonism
hegemonistic
hegemony
heinous
hell
hell-bent
hellion
hells
helpless
helplessly
helplessness
heresy
heretic
heretical
hesitant
hestitant
hideous
hideously
hideousness
high-priced
hiliarious
hinder
hindrance
hiss
hissed
hissing
ho-hum
hoard
hoax
hobble
hogs
hollow
hoodium
hoodwink
hooligan
hopeless
hopelessly
hopelessness
horde
horrendous
horrendously
horrible
horrid
horrific
horrified
horrifies
horrify
horrifying
horrifys
hostage
hostile
hostilities
hostility
hotbeds
hothead
hotheaded
hothouse
hubris
huckster
hum
humid
humiliate
humiliating
humiliation
humming
hung
hurt
hurted
hurtful
hurting
hurts
hustler
hype
hypocricy
hypocrisy
hypocrite
hypocrites
hypocritical
hypocritically
hysteria
hysteric
hysterical
hysterically
hysterics
idiocies
idiocy
idiot
idiotic
idiotically
idiots
idle
ignoble
ignominious
ignominiously
ignominy
ignorance
ignorant
ignore
ill-advised
ill-conceived
ill-defined
ill-designed
ill-fated
ill-favored
ill-formed
ill-mannered
ill-natured
ill-sorted
ill-tempered
ill-treated
ill-treatment
ill-usage
ill-used
illegal
illegally
illegitimate
illicit
illiterate
illness
illogic
illogical
illogically
illusion
illusions
illusory
imaginary
imbalance
imbecile
imbroglio
immaterial
immature
imminence
imminently
immobilized
immoderate
immoderately
immodest
immoral
immorality
immorally
immovable
impair
impaired
impasse
impatience
impatient
impatiently
impeach
impedance
impede
impediment
impending
impenitent
imperfect
imperfection
imperfections
imperfectly
imperialist
imperil
imperious
imperiously
impermissible
impersonal
impertinent
impetuous
impetuously
impiety
impinge
impious
implacable
implausible
implausibly
implicate
implication
implode
impolite
impolitely
impolitic
importunate
importune
impose
imposers
imposing
imposition
impossible
impossiblity
impossibly
impotent
impoverish
impoverished
impractical
imprecate
imprecise
imprecisely
imprecision
imprison
imprisonment
improbability
improbable
improbably
improper
improperly
impropriety
imprudence
imprudent
impudence
impudent
impudently
impugn
impulsive
impulsively
impunity
impure
impurity
inability
inaccuracies
inaccuracy
inaccurate
inaccurately
inaction
inactive
inadequacy
inadequate
inadequately
inadverent
inadverently
inadvisable
inadvisably
inane
inanely
inappropriate
inappropriately
inapt
inaptitude
inarticulate
inattentive
inaudible
incapable
incapably
incautious
incendiary
incense
incessant
incessantly
incite
incitement
incivility
inclement
incognizant
incoherence
incoherent
incoherently
incommensurate
incomparable
incomparably
incompatability
incompatibility
incompatible
incompetence
incompetent
incompetently
incomplete
incompliant
incomprehensible
incomprehension
inconceivable
inconceivably
incongruous
incongruously
inconsequent
inconsequential
inconsequentially
inconsequently
inconsiderate
inconsiderately
inconsistence
inconsistencies
inconsistency
inconsistent
inconsolable
inconsolably
inconstant
inconvenience
inconveniently
incorrect
incorrectly
incorrigible
incorrigibly
incredulous
incredulously
inculcate
indecency
indecent
indecently
indecision
indecisive
indecisively
indecorum
indefensible
indelicate
indeterminable
indeterminably
indeterminate
indifference
indifferent
indigent
indignant
indignantly
indignation
indignity
indiscernible
indiscreet
indiscreetly
indiscretion
indiscriminate
indiscriminately
indiscriminating
indistinguishable
indoctrinate
indoctrination
indolent
indulge
ineffective
ineffectively
ineffectiveness
ineffectual
ineffectually
ineffectualness
inefficacious
inefficacy
inefficiency
inefficient
inefficiently
inelegance
inelegant
ineligible
ineloquent
ineloquently
inept
ineptitude
ineptly
inequalities
inequality
inequitable
inequitably
inequities
inescapable
inescapably
inessential
inevitable
inevitably
inexcusable
inexcusably
inexorable
inexorably
inexperience
inexperienced
inexpert
inexpertly
inexpiable
inexplainable
inextricable
inextricably
infamous
infamously
infamy
infected
infection
infections
inferior
inferiority
infernal
infest
infested
infidel
infidels
infiltrator
infiltrators
infirm
inflame
inflammation
inflammatory
inflammed
inflated
inflationary
inflexible
inflict
infraction
infringe
infringement
infringements
infuriate
infuriated
infuriating
infuriatingly
inglorious
ingrate
ingratitude
inhibit
inhibition
inhospitable
inhospitality
inhuman
inhumane
inhumanity
inimical
inimically
iniquitous
iniquity
injudicious
injure
injurious
injury
injustice
injustices
innuendo
inoperable
inopportune
inordinate
inordinately
insane
insanely
insanity
insatiable
insecure
insecurity
insensible
insensitive
insensitively
insensitivity
insidious
insidiously
insignificance
insignificant
insignificantly
insincere
insincerely
insincerity
insinuate
insinuating
insinuation
insociable
insolence
insolent
insolently
insolvent
insouciance
instability
instable
instigate
instigator
instigators
insubordinate
insubstantial
insubstantially
insufferable
insufferably
insufficiency
insufficient
insufficiently
insular
insult
insulted
insulting
insultingly
insults
insupportable
insupportably
insurmountable
insurmountably
insurrection
intefere
inteferes
intense
interfere
interference
interferes
intermittent
interrupt
interruption
interruptions
intimidate
intimidating
intimidatingly
intimidation
intolerable
intolerablely
intolerance
intoxicate
intractable
intransigence
intransigent
intrude
intrusion
intrusive
inundate
inundated
invader
invalid
invalidate
invalidity
invasive
invective
inveigle
invidious
invidiously
invidiousness
invisible
involuntarily
involuntary
irascible
irate
irately
ire
irk
irked
irking
irks
irksome
irksomely
irksomeness
irksomenesses
ironic
ironical
ironically
ironies
irony
irragularity
irrational
irrationalities
irrationality
irrationally
irrationals
irreconcilable
irrecoverable
irrecoverableness
irrecoverablenesses
irrecoverably
irredeemable
irredeemably
irreformable
irregular
irregularity
irrelevance
irrelevant
irreparable
irreplacible
irrepressible
irresolute
irresolvable
irresponsible
irresponsibly
irretating
irretrievable
irreversible
irritable
irritably
irritant
irritate
irritated
irritating
irritation
irritations
isolate
isolated
isolation
issue
issues
itch
itching
itchy
jabber
jaded
jagged
jam
jarring
jaundiced
jealous
jealously
jealousness
jealousy
jeer
jeering
jeeringly
jeers
jeopardize
jeopardy
jerk
jerky
jitter
jitters
jittery
job-killing
jobless
joke
joker
jolt
judder
juddering
judders
jumpy
junk
junky
junkyard
jutter
jutters
kaput
kill
killed
killer
killing
killjoy
kills
knave
knife
knock
knotted
kook
kooky
lack
lackadaisical
lacked
lackey
lackeys
lacking
lackluster
lacks
laconic
lag
lagged
lagging
laggy
lags
laid-off
lambast
lambaste
lame
lame-duck
lament
lamentable
lamentably
languid
languish
languor
languorous
languorously
lanky
lapse
lapsed
lapses
lascivious
last-ditch
latency
laughable
laughably
laughingstock
lawbreaker
lawbreaking
lawless
lawlessness
layoff
layoff-happy
lazy
leak
leakage
leakages
leaking
leaks
leaky
lech
lecher
lecherous
lechery
leech
leer
leery
left-leaning
lemon
lengthy
less-developed
lesser-known
letch
lethal
lethargic
lethargy
lewd
lewdly
lewdness
liability
liable
liar
liars
licentious
licentiously
licentiousness
lie
lied
lier
lies
life-threatening
lifeless
limit
limitation
limitations
limited
limits
limp
listless
litigious
little-known
livid
lividly
loath
loathe
loathing
loathly
loathsome
loathsomely
lone
loneliness
lonely
loner
lonesome
long-time
long-winded
longing
longingly
loophole
loopholes
loose
loot
lorn
lose
loser
losers
loses
losing
loss
losses
lost
loud
louder
lousy
loveless
lovelorn
low-rated
lowly
ludicrous
ludicrously
lugubrious
lukewarm
lull
lumpy
lunatic
lunaticism
lurch
lure
lurid
lurk
lurking
lying
macabre
mad
madden
maddening
maddeningly
madder
madly
madman
madness
maladjusted
maladjustment
malady
malaise
malcontent
malcontented
maledict
malevolence
malevolent
malevolently
malice
malicious
maliciously
maliciousness
malign
malignant
malodorous
maltreatment
mangle
mangled
mangles
mangling
mania
maniac
maniacal
manic
manipulate
manipulation
manipulative
manipulators
mar
marginal
marginally
martyrdom
martyrdom-seeking
mashed
massacre
massacres
matte
mawkish
mawkishly
mawkishness
meager
meaningless
meanness
measly
meddle
meddlesome
mediocre
mediocrity
melancholy
melodramatic
melodramatically
meltdown
menace
menacing
menacingly
mendacious
mendacity
menial
merciless
mercilessly
mess
messed
messes
messing
messy
midget
miff
militancy
mindless
mindlessly
mirage
mire
misalign
misaligned
misaligns
misapprehend
misbecome
misbecoming
misbegotten
misbehave
misbehavior
miscalculate
miscalculation
miscellaneous
mischief
mischievous
mischievously
misconception
misconceptions
miscreant
miscreants
misdirection
miser
miserable
miserableness
miserably
miseries
miserly
misery
misfit
misfortune
misgiving
misgivings
misguidance
misguide
misguided
mishandle
mishap
misinform
misinformed
misinterpret
misjudge
misjudgment
mislead
misleading
misleadingly
mislike
mismanage
mispronounce
mispronounced
mispronounces
misread
misreading
misrepresent
misrepresentation
miss
missed
misses
misstatement
mist
mistake
mistaken
mistakenly
mistakes
mistified
mistress
mistrust
mistrustful
mistrustfully
mists
misunderstand
misunderstanding
misunderstandings
misunderstood
misuse
moan
mobster
mock
mocked
mockeries
mockery
mocking
mockingly
mocks
molest
molestation
monotonous
monotony
monster
monstrosities
monstrosity
monstrous
monstrously
moody
moot
mope
morbid
morbidly
mordant
mordantly
moribund
moron
moronic
morons
mortification
mortified
mortify
mortifying
motionless
motley
mourn
mourner
mournful
mournfully
muddle
muddy
mudslinger
mudslinging
mulish
multi-polarization
mundane
murder
murderer
murderous
murderously
murky
muscle-flexing
mushy
musty
mysterious
mysteriously
mystery
mystify
myth
nag
nagging
naive
naively
narrower
nastily
nastiness
nasty
naughty
nauseate
nauseates
nauseating
nauseatingly
naÔve
nebulous
nebulously
needless
needlessly
needy
nefarious
nefariously
negate
negation
negative
negatives
negativity
neglect
neglected
negligence
negligent
nemesis
nepotism
nervous
nervously
nervousness
nettle
nettlesome
neurotic
neurotically
niggle
niggles
nightmare
nightmarish
nightmarishly
nitpick
nitpicking
noise
noises
noisier
noisy
non-confidence
nonexistent
nonresponsive
nonsense
nosey
notoriety
notorious
notoriously
noxious
nuisance
numb
obese
object
objection
objectionable
objections
oblique
obliterate
obliterated
oblivious
obnoxious
obnoxiously
obscene
obscenely
obscenity
obscure
obscured
obscures
obscurity
obsess
obsessive
obsessively
obsessiveness
obsolete
obstacle
obstinate
obstinately
obstruct
obstructed
obstructing
obstruction
obstructs
obtrusive
obtuse
occlude
occluded
occludes
occluding
odd
odder
oddest
oddities
oddity
oddly
odor
offence
offend
offender
offending
offenses
offensive
offensively
offensiveness
officious
ominous
ominously
omission
omit
one-sided
onerous
onerously
onslaught
opinionated
opponent
opportunistic
oppose
opposition
oppositions
oppress
oppression
oppressive
oppressively
oppressiveness
oppressors
ordeal
orphan
ostracize
outbreak
outburst
outbursts
outcast
outcry
outlaw
outmoded
outrage
outraged
outrageous
outrageously
outrageousness
outrages
outsider
over-acted
over-awe
over-balanced
over-hyped
over-priced
over-valuation
overact
overacted
overawe
overbalance
overbalanced
overbearing
overbearingly
overblown
overdo
overdone
overdue
overemphasize
overheat
overkill
overloaded
overlook
overpaid
overpayed
overplay
overpower
overpriced
overrated
overreach
overrun
overshadow
oversight
oversights
oversimplification
oversimplified
oversimplify
oversize
overstate
overstated
overstatement
overstatements
overstates
overtaxed
overthrow
overthrows
overturn
overweight
overwhelm
overwhelmed
overwhelming
overwhelmingly
overwhelms
overzealous
overzealously
overzelous
pain
painful
painfull
painfully
pains
pale
pales
paltry
pan
pandemonium
pander
pandering
panders
panic
panick
panicked
panicking
panicky
paradoxical
paradoxically
paralize
paralyzed
paranoia
paranoid
parasite
pariah
parody
partiality
partisan
partisans
passe
passive
passiveness
pathetic
pathetically
patronize
paucity
pauper
paupers
payback
peculiar
peculiarly
pedantic
peeled
peeve
peeved
peevish
peevishly
penalize
penalty
perfidious
perfidity
perfunctory
peril
perilous
perilously
perish
pernicious
perplex
perplexed
perplexing
perplexity
persecute
persecution
pertinacious
pertinaciously
pertinacity
perturb
perturbed
pervasive
perverse
perversely
perversion
perversity
pervert
perverted
perverts
pessimism
pessimistic
pessimistically
pest
pestilent
petrified
petrify
pettifog
petty
phobia
phobic
phony
picket
picketed
picketing
pickets
picky
pig
pigs
pillage
pillory
pimple
pinch
pique
pitiable
pitiful
pitifully
pitiless
pitilessly
pittance
pity
plagiarize
plague
plasticky
plaything
plea
pleas
plebeian
plight
plot
plotters
ploy
plunder
plunderer
pointless
pointlessly
poison
poisonous
poisonously
pokey
poky
polarisation
polemize
pollute
polluter
polluters
polution
pompous
poor
poorer
poorest
poorly
posturing
pout
poverty
powerless
prate
pratfall
prattle
precarious
precariously
precipitate
precipitous
predatory
predicament
prejudge
prejudice
prejudices
prejudicial
premeditated
preoccupy
preposterous
preposterously
presumptuous
presumptuously
pretence
pretend
pretense
pretentious
pretentiously
prevaricate
pricey
pricier
prick
prickle
prickles
prideful
prik
primitive
prison
prisoner
problem
problematic
problems
procrastinate
procrastinates
procrastination
profane
profanity
prohibit
prohibitive
prohibitively
propaganda
propagandize
proprietary
prosecute
protest
protested
protesting
protests
protracted
provocation
provocative
provoke
pry
pugnacious
pugnaciously
pugnacity
punch
punish
punishable
punitive
punk
puny
puppet
puppets
puzzled
puzzlement
puzzling
quack
qualm
qualms
quandary
quarrel
quarrellous
quarrellously
quarrels
quarrelsome
quash
queer
questionable
quibble
quibbles
quitter
rabid
racism
racist
racists
racy
radical
radicalization
radically
radicals
rage
ragged
raging
rail
raked
rampage
rampant
ramshackle
rancor
randomly
rankle
rant
ranted
ranting
rantingly
rants
rape
raped
raping
rascal
rascals
rash
rattle
rattled
rattles
ravage
raving
reactionary
rebellious
rebuff
rebuke
recalcitrant
recant
recession
recessionary
reckless
recklessly
recklessness
recoil
recourses
redundancy
redundant
refusal
refuse
refused
refuses
refusing
refutation
refute
refuted
refutes
refuting
regress
regression
regressive
regret
regreted
regretful
regretfully
regrets
regrettable
regrettably
regretted
reject
rejected
rejecting
rejection
rejects
relapse
relentless
relentlessly
relentlessness
reluctance
reluctant
reluctantly
remorse
remorseful
remorsefully
remorseless
remorselessly
remorselessness
renounce
renunciation
repel
repetitive
reprehensible
reprehensibly
reprehension
reprehensive
repress
repression
repressive
reprimand
reproach
reproachful
reprove
reprovingly
repudiate
repudiation
repugn
repugnance
repugnant
repugnantly
repulse
repulsed
repulsing
repulsive
repulsively
repulsiveness
resent
resentful
resentment
resignation
resigned
resistance
restless
restlessness
restrict
restricted
restriction
restrictive
resurgent
retaliate
retaliatory
retard
retarded
retardedness
retards
reticent
retract
retreat
retreated
revenge
revengeful
revengefully
revert
revile
reviled
revoke
revolt
revolting
revoltingly
revulsion
revulsive
rhapsodize
rhetoric
rhetorical
ricer
ridicule
ridicules
ridiculous
ridiculously
rife
rift
rifts
rigid
rigidity
rigidness
rile
riled
rip
rip-off
ripoff
ripped
risk
risks
risky
rival
rivalry
roadblocks
rocky
rogue
rollercoaster
rot
rotten
rough
rremediable
rubbish
rude
rue
ruffian
ruffle
ruin
ruined
ruining
ruinous
ruins
rumbling
rumor
rumors
rumours
rumple
run-down
runaway
rupture
rust
rusts
rusty
rut
ruthless
ruthlessly
ruthlessness
ruts
sabotage
sack
sacrificed
sad
sadden
sadly
sadness
sag
sagged
sagging
saggy
sags
salacious
sanctimonious
sap
sarcasm
sarcastic
sarcastically
sardonic
sardonically
sass
satirical
satirize
savage
savaged
savagery
savages
scaly
scam
scams
scandal
scandalize
scandalized
scandalous
scandalously
scandals
scandel
scandels
scant
scapegoat
scar
scarce
scarcely
scarcity
scare
scared
scarier
scariest
scarily
scarred
scars
scary
scathing
scathingly
sceptical
scoff
scoffingly
scold
scolded
scolding
scoldingly
scorching
scorchingly
scorn
scornful
scornfully
scoundrel
scourge
scowl
scramble
scrambled
scrambles
scrambling
scrap
scratch
scratched
scratches
scratchy
scream
screech
screw-up
screwed
screwed-up
screwy
scuff
scuffs
scum
scummy
second-class
second-tier
secretive
sedentary
seedy
seethe
seething
self-coup
self-criticism
self-defeating
self-destructive
self-humiliation
self-interest
self-interested
self-serving
selfinterested
selfish
selfishly
selfishness
semi-retarded
senile
sensationalize
senseless
senselessly
seriousness
sermonize
servitude
set-up
setback
setbacks
sever
severe
severity
sh*t
shabby
shadowy
shady
shake
shaky
shallow
sham
shambles
shame
shameful
shamefully
shamefulness
shameless
shamelessly
shamelessness
shark
sharply
shatter
shemale
shimmer
shimmy
shipwreck
shirk
shirker
shit
shiver
shock
shocked
shocking
shockingly
shoddy
short-lived
shortage
shortchange
shortcoming
shortcomings
shortness
shortsighted
shortsightedness
showdown
shrew
shriek
shrill
shrilly
shrivel
shroud
shrouded
shrug
shun
shunned
sick
sicken
sickening
sickeningly
sickly
sickness
sidetrack
sidetracked
siege
sillily
silly
simplistic
simplistically
sin
sinful
sinfully
sinister
sinisterly
sink
sinking
skeletons
skeptic
skeptical
skeptically
skepticism
sketchy
skimpy
skinny
skittish
skittishly
skulk
slack
slander
slanderer
slanderous
slanderously
slanders
slap
slashing
slaughter
slaughtered
slave
slaves
sleazy
slime
slog
slogged
slogging
slogs
sloooooooooooooow
sloooow
slooow
sloow
sloppily
sloppy
sloth
slothful
slow
slow-moving
slowed
slower
slowest
slowly
sloww
slowww
slowwww
slug
sluggish
slump
slumping
slumpping
slur
slut
sluts
sly
smack
smallish
smash
smear
smell
smelled
smelling
smells
smelly
smelt
smoke
smokescreen
smolder
smoldering
smother
smoulder
smouldering
smudge
smudged
smudges
smudging
smug
smugly
smut
smuttier
smuttiest
smutty
snag
snagged
snagging
snags
snappish
snappishly
snare
snarky
snarl
sneak
sneakily
sneaky
sneer
sneering
sneeringly
snob
snobbish
snobby
snobish
snobs
snub
so-cal
soapy
sob
sober
sobering
solemn
solicitude
somber
sore
sorely
soreness
sorrow
sorrowful
sorrowfully
sorry
sour
sourly
spade
spank
spendy
spew
spewed
spewing
spews
spilling
spinster
spiritless
spite
spiteful
spitefully
spitefulness
splatter
split
splitting
spoil
spoilage
spoilages
spoiled
spoilled
spoils
spook
spookier
spookiest
spookily
spooky
spoon-fed
spoon-feed
spoonfed
sporadic
spotty
spurious
spurn
sputter
squabble
squabbling
squander
squash
squeak
squeaks
squeaky
squeal
squealing
squeals
squirm
stab
stagnant
stagnate
stagnation
staid
stain
stains
stale
stalemate
stall
stalls
stammer
stampede
standstill
stark
starkly
startle
startling
startlingly
starvation
starve
static
steal
stealing
steals
steep
steeply
stench
stereotype
stereotypical
stereotypically
stern
stew
sticky
stiff
stiffness
stifle
stifling
stiflingly
stigma
stigmatize
sting
stinging
stingingly
stingy
stink
stinks
stodgy
stole
stolen
stooge
stooges
stormy
straggle
straggler
strain
strained
straining
strange
strangely
stranger
strangest
strangle
streaky
strenuous
stress
stresses
stressful
stressfully
stricken
strict
strictly
strident
stridently
strife
strike
stringent
stringently
struck
struggle
struggled
struggles
struggling
strut
stubborn
stubbornly
stubbornness
stuck
stuffy
stumble
stumbled
stumbles
stump
stumped
stumps
stun
stunt
stunted
stupid
stupidest
stupidity
stupidly
stupified
stupify
stupor
stutter
stuttered
stuttering
stutters
sty
stymied
sub-par
subdued
subjected
subjection
subjugate
subjugation
submissive
subordinate
subpoena
subpoenas
subservience
subservient
substandard
subtract
subversion
subversive
subversively
subvert
succumb
suck
sucked
sucker
sucks
sucky
sue
sued
sueing
sues
suffer
suffered
sufferer
sufferers
suffering
suffers
suffocate
sugar-coat
sugar-coated
sugarcoated
suicidal
suicide
sulk
sullen
sully
sunder
sunk
sunken
superficial
superficiality
superficially
superfluous
superstition
superstitious
suppress
suppression
surrender
susceptible
suspect
suspicion
suspicions
suspicious
suspiciously
swagger
swamped
sweaty
swelled
swelling
swindle
swipe
swollen
symptom
symptoms
syndrome
taboo
tacky
taint
tainted
tamper
tangle
tangled
tangles
tank
tanked
tanks
tantrum
tardy
tarnish
tarnished
tarnishes
tarnishing
tattered
taunt
taunting
tauntingly
taunts
taut
tawdry
taxing
tease
teasingly
tedious
tediously
temerity
temper
tempest
temptation
tenderness
tense
tension
tentative
tentatively
tenuous
tenuously
tepid
terrible
terribleness
terribly
terror
terror-genic
terrorism
terrorize
testily
testy
tetchily
tetchy
thankless
thicker
thirst
thorny
thoughtless
thoughtlessly
thoughtlessness
thrash
threat
threaten
threatening
threats
threesome
throb
throbbed
throbbing
throbs
throttle
thug
thumb-down
thumbs-down
thwart
time-consuming
timid
timidity
timidly
timidness
tin-y
tingled
tingling
tired
tiresome
tiring
tiringly
toil
toll
top-heavy
topple
torment
tormented
torrent
tortuous
torture
tortured
tortures
torturing
torturous
torturously
totalitarian
touchy
toughness
tout
touted
touts
toxic
traduce
tragedy
tragic
tragically
traitor
traitorous
traitorously
tramp
trample
transgress
transgression
trap
traped
trapped
trash
trashed
trashy
trauma
traumatic
traumatically
traumatize
traumatized
travesties
travesty
treacherous
treacherously
treachery
treason
treasonous
trick
tricked
trickery
tricky
trivial
trivialize
trouble
troubled
troublemaker
troubles
troublesome
troublesomely
troubling
troublingly
truant
tumble
tumbled
tumbles
tumultuous
turbulent
turmoil
twist
twisted
twists
two-faced
two-faces
tyrannical
tyrannically
tyranny
tyrant
ugh
uglier
ugliest
ugliness
ugly
ulterior
ultimatum
ultimatums
ultra-hardline
un-viewable
unable
unacceptable
unacceptablely
unacceptably
unaccessible
unaccustomed
unachievable
unaffordable
unappealing
unattractive
unauthentic
unavailable
unavoidably
unbearable
unbearablely
unbelievable
unbelievably
uncaring
uncertain
uncivil
uncivilized
unclean
unclear
uncollectible
uncomfortable
uncomfortably
uncomfy
uncompetitive
uncompromising
uncompromisingly
unconfirmed
unconstitutional
uncontrolled
unconvincing
unconvincingly
uncooperative
uncouth
uncreative
undecided
undefined
undependability
undependable
undercut
undercuts
undercutting
underdog
underestimate
underlings
undermine
undermined
undermines
undermining
underpaid
underpowered
undersized
undesirable
undetermined
undid
undignified
undissolved
undocumented
undone
undue
unease
uneasily
uneasiness
uneasy
uneconomical
unemployed
unequal
unethical
uneven
uneventful
unexpected
unexpectedly
unexplained
unfairly
unfaithful
unfaithfully
unfamiliar
unfavorable
unfeeling
unfinished
unfit
unforeseen
unforgiving
unfortunate
unfortunately
unfounded
unfriendly
unfulfilled
unfunded
ungovernable
ungrateful
unhappily
unhappiness
unhappy
unhealthy
unhelpful
unilateralism
unimaginable
unimaginably
unimportant
uninformed
uninsured
unintelligible
unintelligile
unipolar
unjust
unjustifiable
unjustifiably
unjustified
unjustly
unkind
unkindly
unknown
unlamentable
unlamentably
unlawful
unlawfully
unlawfulness
unleash
unlicensed
unlikely
unlucky
unmoved
unnatural
unnaturally
unnecessary
unneeded
unnerve
unnerved
unnerving
unnervingly
unnoticed
unobserved
unorthodox
unorthodoxy
unpleasant
unpleasantries
unpopular
unpredictable
unprepared
unproductive
unprofitable
unprove
unproved
unproven
unproves
unproving
unqualified
unravel
unraveled
unreachable
unreadable
unrealistic
unreasonable
unreasonably
unrelenting
unrelentingly
unreliability
unreliable
unresolved
unresponsive
unrest
unruly
unsafe
unsatisfactory
unsavory
unscrupulous
unscrupulously
unsecure
unseemly
unsettle
unsettled
unsettling
unsettlingly
unskilled
unsophisticated
unsound
unspeakable
unspeakablely
unspecified
unstable
unsteadily
unsteadiness
unsteady
unsuccessful
unsuccessfully
unsupported
unsupportive
unsure
unsuspecting
unsustainable
untenable
untested
unthinkable
unthinkably
untimely
untouched
untrue
untrustworthy
untruthful
unusable
unusably
unuseable
unuseably
unusual
unusually
unviewable
unwanted
unwarranted
unwatchable
unwelcome
unwell
unwieldy
unwilling
unwillingly
unwillingness
unwise
unwisely
unworkable
unworthy
unyielding
upbraid
upheaval
uprising
uproar
uproarious
uproariously
uproarous
uproarously
uproot
upset
upseting
upsets
upsetting
upsettingly
urgent
useless
usurp
usurper
utterly
vagrant
vague
vagueness
vain
vainly
vanity
vehement
vehemently
vengeance
vengeful
vengefully
vengefulness
venom
venomous
venomously
vent
vestiges
vex
vexation
vexing
vexingly
vibrate
vibrated
vibrates
vibrating
vibration
vice
vicious
viciously
viciousness
victimize
vile
vileness
vilify
villainous
villainously
villains
villian
villianous
villianously
villify
vindictive
vindictively
vindictiveness
violate
violation
violator
violators
violent
violently
viper
virulence
virulent
virulently
virus
vociferous
vociferously
volatile
volatility
vomit
vomited
vomiting
vomits
vulgar
vulnerable
wack
wail
wallow
wane
waning
wanton
war-like
warily
wariness
warlike
warned
warning
warp
warped
wary
washed-out
waste
wasted
wasteful
wastefulness
wasting
water-down
watered-down
wayward
weak
weaken
weakening
weaker
weakness
weaknesses
weariness
wearisome
weary
wedge
weed
weep
weird
weirdly
wheedle
whimper
whine
whining
whiny
whips
whore
whores
wicked
wickedly
wickedness
wild
wildly
wiles
wilt
wily
wimpy
wince
wobble
wobbled
wobbles
woe
woebegone
woeful
woefully
womanizer
womanizing
worn
worried
worriedly
worrier
worries
worrisome
worry
worrying
worryingly
worse
worsen
worsening
worst
worthless
worthlessly
worthlessness
wound
wounds
wrangle
wrath
wreak
wreaked
wreaks
wreck
wrest
wrestle
wretch
wretched
wretchedly
wretchedness
wrinkle
wrinkled
wrinkles
wrip
wripped
wripping
writhe
wrong
wrongful
wrongly
wrought
yawn
zap
zapped
zaps
zealot
zealous
zealously
zombie
;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;
; 
; Opinion Lexicon: Positive
;
; This file contains a list of POSITIVE opinion words (or sentiment words).
;
; This file and the papers can all be downloaded from 
;    http://www.cs.uic.edu/~liub/FBS/sentiment-analysis.html
;
; If you use this list, please cite one of the following two papers:
;
;   Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. "Mining and Summarizing Customer Reviews." 
;       Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge 
;       Discovery and Data Mining (KDD-2004), Aug 22-25, 2004, Seattle, 
;       Washington, USA, 
;   Bing Liu, Minqing Hu and Junsheng Cheng. "Opinion Observer: Analyzing 
;       and Comparing Opinions on the Web." Proceedings of the 14th 
;       International World Wide Web conference (WWW-2005), May 10-14, 
;       2005, Chiba, Japan.
;
; Notes: 
;    1. The appearance of an opinion word in a sentence does not necessarily  
;       mean that the sentence expresses a positive or negative opinion. 
;       See the paper below:
;
;       Bing Liu. "Sentiment Analysis and Subjectivity." An chapter in 
;          Handbook of Natural Language Processing, Second Edition, 
;          (editors: N. Indurkhya and F. J. Damerau), 2010.
;
;    2. You will notice many misspelled words in the list. They are not 
;       mistakes. They are included as these misspelled words appear 
;       frequently in social media content. 
;
;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;

a+
abound
abounds
abundance
abundant
accessable
accessible
acclaim
acclaimed
acclamation
accolade
accolades
accommodative
accomodative
accomplish
accomplished
accomplishment
accomplishments
accurate
accurately
achievable
achievement
achievements
achievible
acumen
adaptable
adaptive
adequate
adjustable
admirable
admirably
admiration
admire
admirer
admiring
admiringly
adorable
adore
adored
adorer
adoring
adoringly
adroit
adroitly
adulate
adulation
adulatory
advanced
advantage
advantageous
advantageously
advantages
adventuresome
adventurous
advocate
advocated
advocates
affability
affable
affably
affectation
affection
affectionate
affinity
affirm
affirmation
affirmative
affluence
affluent
afford
affordable
affordably
afordable
agile
agilely
agility
agreeable
agreeableness
agreeably
all-around
alluring
alluringly
altruistic
altruistically
amaze
amazed
amazement
amazes
amazing
amazingly
ambitious
ambitiously
ameliorate
amenable
amenity
amiability
amiabily
amiable
amicability
amicable
amicably
amity
ample
amply
amuse
amusing
amusingly
angel
angelic
apotheosis
appeal
appealing
applaud
appreciable
appreciate
appreciated
appreciates
appreciative
appreciatively
appropriate
approval
approve
ardent
ardently
ardor
articulate
aspiration
aspirations
aspire
assurance
assurances
assure
assuredly
assuring
astonish
astonished
astonishing
astonishingly
astonishment
astound
astounded
astounding
astoundingly
astutely
attentive
attraction
attractive
attractively
attune
audible
audibly
auspicious
authentic
authoritative
autonomous
available
aver
avid
avidly
award
awarded
awards
awe
awed
awesome
awesomely
awesomeness
awestruck
awsome
backbone
balanced
bargain
beauteous
beautiful
beautifullly
beautifully
beautify
beauty
beckon
beckoned
beckoning
beckons
believable
believeable
beloved
benefactor
beneficent
beneficial
beneficially
beneficiary
benefit
benefits
benevolence
benevolent
benifits
best
best-known
best-performing
best-selling
better
better-known
better-than-expected
beutifully
blameless
bless
blessing
bliss
blissful
blissfully
blithe
blockbuster
bloom
blossom
bolster
bonny
bonus
bonuses
boom
booming
boost
boundless
bountiful
brainiest
brainy
brand-new
brave
bravery
bravo
breakthrough
breakthroughs
breathlessness
breathtaking
breathtakingly
breeze
bright
brighten
brighter
brightest
brilliance
brilliances
brilliant
brilliantly
brisk
brotherly
bullish
buoyant
cajole
calm
calming
calmness
capability
capable
capably
captivate
captivating
carefree
cashback
cashbacks
catchy
celebrate
celebrated
celebration
celebratory
champ
champion
charisma
charismatic
charitable
charm
charming
charmingly
chaste
cheaper
cheapest
cheer
cheerful
cheery
cherish
cherished
cherub
chic
chivalrous
chivalry
civility
civilize
clarity
classic
classy
clean
cleaner
cleanest
cleanliness
cleanly
clear
clear-cut
cleared
clearer
clearly
clears
clever
cleverly
cohere
coherence
coherent
cohesive
colorful
comely
comfort
comfortable
comfortably
comforting
comfy
commend
commendable
commendably
commitment
commodious
compact
compactly
compassion
compassionate
compatible
competitive
complement
complementary
complemented
complements
compliant
compliment
complimentary
comprehensive
conciliate
conciliatory
concise
confidence
confident
congenial
congratulate
congratulation
congratulations
congratulatory
conscientious
considerate
consistent
consistently
constructive
consummate
contentment
continuity
contrasty
contribution
convenience
convenient
conveniently
convience
convienient
convient
convincing
convincingly
cool
coolest
cooperative
cooperatively
cornerstone
correct
correctly
cost-effective
cost-saving
counter-attack
counter-attacks
courage
courageous
courageously
courageousness
courteous
courtly
covenant
cozy
creative
credence
credible
crisp
crisper
cure
cure-all
cushy
cute
cuteness
danke
danken
daring
daringly
darling
dashing
dauntless
dawn
dazzle
dazzled
dazzling
dead-cheap
dead-on
decency
decent
decisive
decisiveness
dedicated
defeat
defeated
defeating
defeats
defender
deference
deft
deginified
delectable
delicacy
delicate
delicious
delight
delighted
delightful
delightfully
delightfulness
dependable
dependably
deservedly
deserving
desirable
desiring
desirous
destiny
detachable
devout
dexterous
dexterously
dextrous
dignified
dignify
dignity
diligence
diligent
diligently
diplomatic
dirt-cheap
distinction
distinctive
distinguished
diversified
divine
divinely
dominate
dominated
dominates
dote
dotingly
doubtless
dreamland
dumbfounded
dumbfounding
dummy-proof
durable
dynamic
eager
eagerly
eagerness
earnest
earnestly
earnestness
ease
eased
eases
easier
easiest
easiness
easing
easy
easy-to-use
easygoing
ebullience
ebullient
ebulliently
ecenomical
economical
ecstasies
ecstasy
ecstatic
ecstatically
edify
educated
effective
effectively
effectiveness
effectual
efficacious
efficient
efficiently
effortless
effortlessly
effusion
effusive
effusively
effusiveness
elan
elate
elated
elatedly
elation
electrify
elegance
elegant
elegantly
elevate
elite
eloquence
eloquent
eloquently
embolden
eminence
eminent
empathize
empathy
empower
empowerment
enchant
enchanted
enchanting
enchantingly
encourage
encouragement
encouraging
encouragingly
endear
endearing
endorse
endorsed
endorsement
endorses
endorsing
energetic
energize
energy-efficient
energy-saving
engaging
engrossing
enhance
enhanced
enhancement
enhances
enjoy
enjoyable
enjoyably
enjoyed
enjoying
enjoyment
enjoys
enlighten
enlightenment
enliven
ennoble
enough
enrapt
enrapture
enraptured
enrich
enrichment
enterprising
entertain
entertaining
entertains
enthral
enthrall
enthralled
enthuse
enthusiasm
enthusiast
enthusiastic
enthusiastically
entice
enticed
enticing
enticingly
entranced
entrancing
entrust
enviable
enviably
envious
enviously
enviousness
envy
equitable
ergonomical
err-free
erudite
ethical
eulogize
euphoria
euphoric
euphorically
evaluative
evenly
eventful
everlasting
evocative
exalt
exaltation
exalted
exaltedly
exalting
exaltingly
examplar
examplary
excallent
exceed
exceeded
exceeding
exceedingly
exceeds
excel
exceled
excelent
excellant
excelled
excellence
excellency
excellent
excellently
excels
exceptional
exceptionally
excite
excited
excitedly
excitedness
excitement
excites
exciting
excitingly
exellent
exemplar
exemplary
exhilarate
exhilarating
exhilaratingly
exhilaration
exonerate
expansive
expeditiously
expertly
exquisite
exquisitely
extol
extoll
extraordinarily
extraordinary
exuberance
exuberant
exuberantly
exult
exultant
exultation
exultingly
eye-catch
eye-catching
eyecatch
eyecatching
fabulous
fabulously
facilitate
fair
fairly
fairness
faith
faithful
faithfully
faithfulness
fame
famed
famous
famously
fancier
fancinating
fancy
fanfare
fans
fantastic
fantastically
fascinate
fascinating
fascinatingly
fascination
fashionable
fashionably
fast
fast-growing
fast-paced
faster
fastest
fastest-growing
faultless
fav
fave
favor
favorable
favored
favorite
favorited
favour
fearless
fearlessly
feasible
feasibly
feat
feature-rich
fecilitous
feisty
felicitate
felicitous
felicity
fertile
fervent
fervently
fervid
fervidly
fervor
festive
fidelity
fiery
fine
fine-looking
finely
finer
finest
firmer
first-class
first-in-class
first-rate
flashy
flatter
flattering
flatteringly
flawless
flawlessly
flexibility
flexible
flourish
flourishing
fluent
flutter
fond
fondly
fondness
foolproof
foremost
foresight
formidable
fortitude
fortuitous
fortuitously
fortunate
fortunately
fortune
fragrant
free
freed
freedom
freedoms
fresh
fresher
freshest
friendliness
friendly
frolic
frugal
fruitful
ftw
fulfillment
fun
futurestic
futuristic
gaiety
gaily
gain
gained
gainful
gainfully
gaining
gains
gallant
gallantly
galore
geekier
geeky
gem
gems
generosity
generous
generously
genial
genius
gentle
gentlest
genuine
gifted
glad
gladden
gladly
gladness
glamorous
glee
gleeful
gleefully
glimmer
glimmering
glisten
glistening
glitter
glitz
glorify
glorious
gloriously
glory
glow
glowing
glowingly
god-given
god-send
godlike
godsend
gold
golden
good
goodly
goodness
goodwill
goood
gooood
gorgeous
gorgeously
grace
graceful
gracefully
gracious
graciously
graciousness
grand
grandeur
grateful
gratefully
gratification
gratified
gratifies
gratify
gratifying
gratifyingly
gratitude
great
greatest
greatness
grin
groundbreaking
guarantee
guidance
guiltless
gumption
gush
gusto
gutsy
hail
halcyon
hale
hallmark
hallmarks
hallowed
handier
handily
hands-down
handsome
handsomely
handy
happier
happily
happiness
happy
hard-working
hardier
hardy
harmless
harmonious
harmoniously
harmonize
harmony
headway
heal
healthful
healthy
hearten
heartening
heartfelt
heartily
heartwarming
heaven
heavenly
helped
helpful
helping
hero
heroic
heroically
heroine
heroize
heros
high-quality
high-spirited
hilarious
holy
homage
honest
honesty
honor
honorable
honored
honoring
hooray
hopeful
hospitable
hot
hotcake
hotcakes
hottest
hug
humane
humble
humility
humor
humorous
humorously
humour
humourous
ideal
idealize
ideally
idol
idolize
idolized
idyllic
illuminate
illuminati
illuminating
illumine
illustrious
ilu
imaculate
imaginative
immaculate
immaculately
immense
impartial
impartiality
impartially
impassioned
impeccable
impeccably
important
impress
impressed
impresses
impressive
impressively
impressiveness
improve
improved
improvement
improvements
improves
improving
incredible
incredibly
indebted
individualized
indulgence
indulgent
industrious
inestimable
inestimably
inexpensive
infallibility
infallible
infallibly
influential
ingenious
ingeniously
ingenuity
ingenuous
ingenuously
innocuous
innovation
innovative
inpressed
insightful
insightfully
inspiration
inspirational
inspire
inspiring
instantly
instructive
instrumental
integral
integrated
intelligence
intelligent
intelligible
interesting
interests
intimacy
intimate
intricate
intrigue
intriguing
intriguingly
intuitive
invaluable
invaluablely
inventive
invigorate
invigorating
invincibility
invincible
inviolable
inviolate
invulnerable
irreplaceable
irreproachable
irresistible
irresistibly
issue-free
jaw-droping
jaw-dropping
jollify
jolly
jovial
joy
joyful
joyfully
joyous
joyously
jubilant
jubilantly
jubilate
jubilation
jubiliant
judicious
justly
keen
keenly
keenness
kid-friendly
kindliness
kindly
kindness
knowledgeable
kudos
large-capacity
laud
laudable
laudably
lavish
lavishly
law-abiding
lawful
lawfully
lead
leading
leads
lean
led
legendary
leverage
levity
liberate
liberation
liberty
lifesaver
light-hearted
lighter
likable
like
liked
likes
liking
lionhearted
lively
logical
long-lasting
lovable
lovably
love
loved
loveliness
lovely
lover
loves
loving
low-cost
low-price
low-priced
low-risk
lower-priced
loyal
loyalty
lucid
lucidly
luck
luckier
luckiest
luckiness
lucky
lucrative
luminous
lush
luster
lustrous
luxuriant
luxuriate
luxurious
luxuriously
luxury
lyrical
magic
magical
magnanimous
magnanimously
magnificence
magnificent
magnificently
majestic
majesty
manageable
maneuverable
marvel
marveled
marvelled
marvellous
marvelous
marvelously
marvelousness
marvels
master
masterful
masterfully
masterpiece
masterpieces
masters
mastery
matchless
mature
maturely
maturity
meaningful
memorable
merciful
mercifully
mercy
merit
meritorious
merrily
merriment
merriness
merry
mesmerize
mesmerized
mesmerizes
mesmerizing
mesmerizingly
meticulous
meticulously
mightily
mighty
mind-blowing
miracle
miracles
miraculous
miraculously
miraculousness
modern
modest
modesty
momentous
monumental
monumentally
morality
motivated
multi-purpose
navigable
neat
neatest
neatly
nice
nicely
nicer
nicest
nifty
nimble
noble
nobly
noiseless
non-violence
non-violent
notably
noteworthy
nourish
nourishing
nourishment
novelty
nurturing
oasis
obsession
obsessions
obtainable
openly
openness
optimal
optimism
optimistic
opulent
orderly
originality
outdo
outdone
outperform
outperformed
outperforming
outperforms
outshine
outshone
outsmart
outstanding
outstandingly
outstrip
outwit
ovation
overjoyed
overtake
overtaken
overtakes
overtaking
overtook
overture
pain-free
painless
painlessly
palatial
pamper
pampered
pamperedly
pamperedness
pampers
panoramic
paradise
paramount
pardon
passion
passionate
passionately
patience
patient
patiently
patriot
patriotic
peace
peaceable
peaceful
peacefully
peacekeepers
peach
peerless
pep
pepped
pepping
peppy
peps
perfect
perfection
perfectly
permissible
perseverance
persevere
personages
personalized
phenomenal
phenomenally
picturesque
piety
pinnacle
playful
playfully
pleasant
pleasantly
pleased
pleases
pleasing
pleasingly
pleasurable
pleasurably
pleasure
plentiful
pluses
plush
plusses
poetic
poeticize
poignant
poise
poised
polished
polite
politeness
popular
portable
posh
positive
positively
positives
powerful
powerfully
praise
praiseworthy
praising
pre-eminent
precious
precise
precisely
preeminent
prefer
preferable
preferably
prefered
preferes
preferring
prefers
premier
prestige
prestigious
prettily
pretty
priceless
pride
principled
privilege
privileged
prize
proactive
problem-free
problem-solver
prodigious
prodigiously
prodigy
productive
productively
proficient
proficiently
profound
profoundly
profuse
profusion
progress
progressive
prolific
prominence
prominent
promise
promised
promises
promising
promoter
prompt
promptly
proper
properly
propitious
propitiously
pros
prosper
prosperity
prosperous
prospros
protect
protection
protective
proud
proven
proves
providence
proving
prowess
prudence
prudent
prudently
punctual
pure
purify
purposeful
quaint
qualified
qualify
quicker
quiet
quieter
radiance
radiant
rapid
rapport
rapt
rapture
raptureous
raptureously
rapturous
rapturously
rational
razor-sharp
reachable
readable
readily
ready
reaffirm
reaffirmation
realistic
realizable
reasonable
reasonably
reasoned
reassurance
reassure
receptive
reclaim
recomend
recommend
recommendation
recommendations
recommended
reconcile
reconciliation
record-setting
recover
recovery
rectification
rectify
rectifying
redeem
redeeming
redemption
refine
refined
refinement
reform
reformed
reforming
reforms
refresh
refreshed
refreshing
refund
refunded
regal
regally
regard
rejoice
rejoicing
rejoicingly
rejuvenate
rejuvenated
rejuvenating
relaxed
relent
reliable
reliably
relief
relish
remarkable
remarkably
remedy
remission
remunerate
renaissance
renewed
renown
renowned
replaceable
reputable
reputation
resilient
resolute
resound
resounding
resourceful
resourcefulness
respect
respectable
respectful
respectfully
respite
resplendent
responsibly
responsive
restful
restored
restructure
restructured
restructuring
retractable
revel
revelation
revere
reverence
reverent
reverently
revitalize
revival
revive
revives
revolutionary
revolutionize
revolutionized
revolutionizes
reward
rewarding
rewardingly
rich
richer
richly
richness
right
righten
righteous
righteously
righteousness
rightful
rightfully
rightly
rightness
risk-free
robust
rock-star
rock-stars
rockstar
rockstars
romantic
romantically
romanticize
roomier
roomy
rosy
safe
safely
sagacity
sagely
saint
saintliness
saintly
salutary
salute
sane
satisfactorily
satisfactory
satisfied
satisfies
satisfy
satisfying
satisified
saver
savings
savior
savvy
scenic
seamless
seasoned
secure
securely
selective
self-determination
self-respect
self-satisfaction
self-sufficiency
self-sufficient
sensation
sensational
sensationally
sensations
sensible
sensibly
sensitive
serene
serenity
sexy
sharp
sharper
sharpest
shimmering
shimmeringly
shine
shiny
significant
silent
simpler
simplest
simplified
simplifies
simplify
simplifying
sincere
sincerely
sincerity
skill
skilled
skillful
skillfully
slammin
sleek
slick
smart
smarter
smartest
smartly
smile
smiles
smiling
smilingly
smitten
smooth
smoother
smoothes
smoothest
smoothly
snappy
snazzy
sociable
soft
softer
solace
solicitous
solicitously
solid
solidarity
soothe
soothingly
sophisticated
soulful
soundly
soundness
spacious
sparkle
sparkling
spectacular
spectacularly
speedily
speedy
spellbind
spellbinding
spellbindingly
spellbound
spirited
spiritual
splendid
splendidly
splendor
spontaneous
sporty
spotless
sprightly
stability
stabilize
stable
stainless
standout
state-of-the-art
stately
statuesque
staunch
staunchly
staunchness
steadfast
steadfastly
steadfastness
steadiest
steadiness
steady
stellar
stellarly
stimulate
stimulates
stimulating
stimulative
stirringly
straighten
straightforward
streamlined
striking
strikingly
striving
strong
stronger
strongest
stunned
stunning
stunningly
stupendous
stupendously
sturdier
sturdy
stylish
stylishly
stylized
suave
suavely
sublime
subsidize
subsidized
subsidizes
subsidizing
substantive
succeed
succeeded
succeeding
succeeds
succes
success
successes
successful
successfully
suffice
sufficed
suffices
sufficient
sufficiently
suitable
sumptuous
sumptuously
sumptuousness
super
superb
superbly
superior
superiority
supple
support
supported
supporter
supporting
supportive
supports
supremacy
supreme
supremely
supurb
supurbly
surmount
surpass
surreal
survival
survivor
sustainability
sustainable
swank
swankier
swankiest
swanky
sweeping
sweet
sweeten
sweetheart
sweetly
sweetness
swift
swiftness
talent
talented
talents
tantalize
tantalizing
tantalizingly
tempt
tempting
temptingly
tenacious
tenaciously
tenacity
tender
tenderly
terrific
terrifically
thank
thankful
thinner
thoughtful
thoughtfully
thoughtfulness
thrift
thrifty
thrill
thrilled
thrilling
thrillingly
thrills
thrive
thriving
thumb-up
thumbs-up
tickle
tidy
time-honored
timely
tingle
titillate
titillating
titillatingly
togetherness
tolerable
toll-free
top
top-notch
top-quality
topnotch
tops
tough
tougher
toughest
traction
tranquil
tranquility
transparent
treasure
tremendously
trendy
triumph
triumphal
triumphant
triumphantly
trivially
trophy
trouble-free
trump
trumpet
trust
trusted
trusting
trustingly
trustworthiness
trustworthy
trusty
truthful
truthfully
truthfulness
twinkly
ultra-crisp
unabashed
unabashedly
unaffected
unassailable
unbeatable
unbiased
unbound
uncomplicated
unconditional
undamaged
undaunted
understandable
undisputable
undisputably
undisputed
unencumbered
unequivocal
unequivocally
unfazed
unfettered
unforgettable
unity
unlimited
unmatched
unparalleled
unquestionable
unquestionably
unreal
unrestricted
unrivaled
unselfish
unwavering
upbeat
upgradable
upgradeable
upgraded
upheld
uphold
uplift
uplifting
upliftingly
upliftment
upscale
usable
useable
useful
user-friendly
user-replaceable
valiant
valiantly
valor
valuable
variety
venerate
verifiable
veritable
versatile
versatility
vibrant
vibrantly
victorious
victory
viewable
vigilance
vigilant
virtue
virtuous
virtuously
visionary
vivacious
vivid
vouch
vouchsafe
warm
warmer
warmhearted
warmly
warmth
wealthy
welcome
well
well-backlit
well-balanced
well-behaved
well-being
well-bred
well-connected
well-educated
well-established
well-informed
well-intentioned
well-known
well-made
well-managed
well-mannered
well-positioned
well-received
well-regarded
well-rounded
well-run
well-wishers
wellbeing
whoa
wholeheartedly
wholesome
whooa
whoooa
wieldy
willing
willingly
willingness
win
windfall
winnable
winner
winners
winning
wins
wisdom
wise
wisely
witty
won
wonder
wonderful
wonderfully
wonderous
wonderously
wonders
wondrous
woo
work
workable
worked
works
world-famous
worth
worth-while
worthiness
worthwhile
worthy
wow
wowed
wowing
wows
yay
youthful
zeal
zenith
zest
zippy
